[00:00:02] EVAN SELINGER:
Hey, it's great to talk with you today, Professor Jesus Aguilar. And the reason we're chatting-- I never need a good reason. There are so many important things that you have to say. But for today, it's because of this online ethics of AI course that I'm teaching. And we're going to be starting off trying to have a sense of, what is AI? And we'll be considering a very provocative idea. And this provocative idea comes from Mustafa Suleyman. And this was in his Ted Talk, What is AI Anyway? And he offers this very fascinating thesis, and that's that we should understand AI as a new kind of digital species. Now, as I'm sure most of the students know, although Suleyman is sounding like a philosopher, he's an AI entrepreneur. He achieved renown when he co-founded DeepMind. And when he gave this talk, he was certainly one of the most influential people in the AI space because he was the CEO of Microsoft AI. So he's obviously very, very serious in how we should understand AI. And yet in making such a proposal that we should understand AI as a new digital species, this definitely sounds philosophical. And that's why I wanted to talk with you today, Jesus, because you're my colleague at RIT, but your specialties are a little different than mine. You focus on the philosophy of mind and philosophy of action, philosophy of cognitive science. And I think you're going to be not only maybe a little sympathetic to Suleyman's views. I think drawing from your background, you'll have very interesting things to say that will really help the students understand why we should deeply consider this very provocative idea. But before we get into his views, I think it's always important to get a sense of who am I talking to? Who is it that has a take on things? So say a little bit about you. Why is a philosopher having this background? Why are you interested in AI?

[00:01:58] JESUS AGUILAR:
Yeah. Well, thanks, Evan, for this invitation. Well, I mean, AI has been with us in philosophy for a long, long time. People sometimes don't realize that. But AI has been essentially one of the focus of attention of anybody who cares about the mind, anybody who cares about the possibility of other minds from a philosophical perspective. I mean, not surprisingly, for instance, the famous Turing contribution that led us to Turing machines and to the famous Turing test appeared in a paper published in Philosophy Mind. So philosophy has always been related to AI. And more specifically, these days, of course, things have become even more, I suppose, energized, because now we're forced to think about something like AI from a philosophical perspective, which means to think about the foundational categories, the foundational notions, the foundational issues that have to do with AI. As you know very well, we philosophers excel in generalizing and looking into the foundations of things. And even categories like, what is artificial? Not to speak, what is intelligence? Those are really philosophical issues. So we have a lot to say from a philosophical perspective. And of course, we can go into more detail if we think about, for instance, the role of some philosophical disciplines, some of which you mentioned that I work on, like philosophy of mind. If you care about what the mind is, one of the key attributes of a mind is typically reason and intelligence. And here we have an expression of a technology that seems to exhibit these features. Are they really minds. And not to speak of ethical considerations to think about, what is the category that these systems have? Can they aspire to belong to the ethical sphere? And if so, should we relate to them in the way in which we relate to other individuals that exhibit those features that we consider ethically relevant? And, of course, more specifically, and this comes close to, what you do? We care about issues like privacy. We care issues about the dangers of this technology that have all these ethical considerations. So it's a whole array of topics that are philosophically relevant.

[00:04:29] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah. And speaking of philosophically relevant and foundational, let's get into this. [INTERPOSING VOICES] --AI because this proposal that AI is a new digital species, at face value, it sounds a little odd. But certainly, Suleyman isn't alone in making this claim. One of your intellectual heroes in this space, Geoffrey Hinton, Nobel Prize winner, someone who has been called the godfather of AI is called AI in alien species. So there's got to be something to this analogy. And what I want us to talk about is, why is it that Suleyman sees AI this way? What are the strengths and weaknesses of looking at AI through the comparison of being a new type of species? A lot hangs on how we define and understand AI. Suleyman is very clear. He's an AI optimist. And in connection with this idea, he's portraying a very specific future. And in this future, people, businesses, and governments, they're all represented by personal AIs. And these digital species, he's hoping, they're going to be infinitely knowledgeable, factually accurate and reliable. And on top of this, capable of exhibiting empathy and creativity. So let's start off foundationally. He's comparing AI to a new digital species because he thinks AI is fundamentally different from all of our previous inventions. And because he thinks it's so different, he thinks we don't have adequate language to fully capture what AI is. We need a new comparison. And there's a pragmatic aspect to this. He says, look, we can't control and we can't govern what we don't understand. So we need to start with something that will help give us some understanding. So what do you think? Let's start unpacking this. Obviously, he's beginning by saying AI is something fundamentally new. It's not correctly described and it's not understood properly if we call it a mere tool. That's why he's calling it a species, not a tool. Now, at face value, I think this sounds a little strange. People often refer to things that have AI in them as AI-powered tools. But he's insisting that we've hit an inflection point, a point where we need to think about AI as something that really isn't tool-like. It's something, he says, it evolves and it adapts. He imagines AI becoming companions in our life's journey. And eventually, he thinks it's going to outpace our own biological evolution. And in fact, as he goes on in the Ted Talk, he's emphasizing that AI will have an ability not just to communicate, but to communicate in a way where it is remembering. It has a personality, showing creativity. So much more-- OK, so here's the question, is he right to differentiate AI from being a mere tool and to compare it to a new species?

[00:07:26] JESUS AGUILAR:
OK. Well, you covered a lot of ground. So let's take it step-by-step. And by the way, this is philosophy. Just as a continuation of your first question and my answer to it, here we are. We're trying to make sense of this new technology from what clearly is a perspective that is philosophical because of the foundational, the generality of the questions that we're asking. So OK, let's take some of the ideas that Suleyman has proposed.

[00:07:55] EVAN SELINGER:
Start off with the tool. Should we treat it as a tool?

[00:07:59] JESUS AGUILAR:
Right. I think that it is inevitably correct to say yes, there is a sense in which we are developing these systems as means to accomplish things that resemble clearly what we identify as a tool. In other words, there are products that are artificial. They're human made. And they're designed to give us some results that resemble what we do with machinery or with a hammer. So yes, I don't think there is-- I mean, there is nothing incorrect to begin thinking about these technology as a tool. The problems begin when you look at the specifics of these technology. When then the mere categorization as a tool doesn't seem to be sufficient. So a tool, for instance, simply-- well, it's usually understood in terms of something that you can control. Yes, a tool can get out of control. Sometimes there you are driving your car. You have an accident and you can say, well, the tool that I was using malfunctioned and the accident took place. But under normal circumstances, the automobile is essentially a tool that the driver controls. So I think that in that respect, the questions that he's asking about whether-- I'm talking about Suleyman, whether this qualifies as a tool, are correct. To some extent, I think that's the case. We produce them. We can control them up to a point. But now we reached a point in which given the sophistication of these tools, when the questions are now very serious about whether we can control them. And now we start talking about things like them having some sort of autonomy that by default means that they would reach decisions. They would produce actions that are not controlled by anyone but by themselves. So this challenges the idea that these are mere tools. So I don't know. I think that it is safe to say that there is a general description in which they qualify as tools. But what has happened, especially in the last years, is we have developed systems that are so sophisticated that the idea that tools understood as means that we have to change the world and means that we can control are not applicable so easily anymore. And if we look towards the future, if we attribute to them things like autonomy, it's going to be very, very challenging to say they're just tools. By default, the idea of autonomy is that they will take initiatives that we cannot control.

[00:10:44] EVAN SELINGER:
But the flip side of that. So if we say yes, mirror tool-like features, isn't a sufficient description? He doesn't just pause there. He finishes the sentence and says, so what we need to start understanding them as being like a new digital species. What do you make of that?

[00:11:06] JESUS AGUILAR:
Well, I think we have to be careful. This is what I said, that there are a lot of things contained in your previous preparation of this question. I mean, there are a lot of topics that we are covering here. I think that on the face of it for me is more like a metaphor. I think that given the features that we are encountering with these systems, it is very tempting to say, look, precisely because they are acquiring some autonomy that in a sense suggests that they will have their own agendas. Maybe a better way of understanding these things is in terms of the way we understand species, say, from a biological perspective. I mean, what qualifies as species? Of course, when we talk about a biological species, we typically understand a different species from another in terms of, for instance, their genetic information that distinguishes one group from the other. But not only that, each one of those groups has their own biological agenda. I mean, if you want to take the crude approach to this, is they're in the business of passing on their genes, their genes that are different from other species. So then you start to have several elements that I think inform the analogy that Suleyman is using. So, for instance, it is perfectly conceivable that just as biological species have their agendas in terms of their own interests, they will compete with other species. So it is possible that as these technologies-- as AI develops, it will have its own agenda, an agenda that may not be the same as ours. So that resembles a bit what happens with species. Second of all, amongst the agenda that typically we encounter in biological species is survival, reproduction, and dominance. And then the analogy here with AI would be to say there is a way in which you can understand this technology in which they will develop precisely something analogous to that. Their own goals, goals that often can be understood in terms of survival, competition, and destruction with the competing other species. So I think it's a fertile analogy, but it has its limits. Clearly, one of the things that troubles me when people talk about AI as species is that in the case of species, we have a somewhat decent criteria to distinguish one species from another. We can distinguish, I don't know, a giraffe from an elephant. But, is there any set of traits that we can identify that all the systems that we call AI share? I think that's something that we can talk of course, a bit later if you want to. It's not clear to me that when we talk about AI, we're talking about a unified species. I think we're still at the very initial stages of making sense philosophically, precisely, of this new technology. And we're tempted to talk about it as if it was a unified entity, like the elephants or the giraffes. So I think that, that will already tell me that we have to be careful with this metaphor. It is a metaphor. I don't know what you think about this.

[00:14:19] EVAN SELINGER:
I think that sounds right. And he's clear, it's a metaphor. He's trying to just help us think in a new way, open up our minds so that they're not closed off. But at the same time, there's a potential tension in opening up our minds this way. Because on the one hand, he's saying it isn't normally like a tool or an ordinary tool. In that sense, you need something else. He's going with digital species. But he also says AI is us. Now to me-- [INTERPOSING VOICES]  --both a new species. He doesn't just say it is us. He says it is all of us. He says it's a reflection of our humanity. What does this mean? And how does somebody who recognizes that also propose we should think of it as being like a new digital species? How do [INAUDIBLE] these apparent tensions and whether they're resolvable.

[00:15:15] JESUS AGUILAR:
Yeah. I think that's an inconsistency. But if you recall the video that we're talking about, this appears towards the end. In other words, I think after he develops the idea that maybe we should think about AI as a new species, a digital species, but still another species, then he ends up with this suggestion that you're making, that you're recalling. And I think that that's an inconsistency. It's either or here. If it's a different species, how can it be us? But we can talk about that a bit later.

[00:15:45] EVAN SELINGER:
Don't you think he just means insofar as some of the training data comes from things humans have communicated? There may be certain biases in a foundational model. And where are these biases coming from? Well, they're coming from us. Because we provided the training data. So I'm wondering if you think that's what he might mean.

[00:16:04] JESUS AGUILAR:
Sure. I think that's what he does mean. But other things too. So let's talk about it. But I want to come back to the species point, because I think that before we move away from the species, I think that we can still stretch the analogy with species to make it more productive and to see what he's after. And I think there's some significant ideas that he wants to emphasize that we should pay attention to. But you're right. If we just go to the end of the talk when he essentially says, look, this technology is perhaps, in a sense, just an extension of us. It's us. I think that would create not only a tension with the idea that we're dealing with a different species because then no, we're dealing only with a single species, meaning us. But also the question as you're asking is, why would anybody say something like that? And I think one answer is the one that you provided. But I would also suggest that from a purely philosophical perspective, say informed by philosophy of mind and action, which is my field, one of the interesting things that we encounter in this technology is that they exhibit traits that are typically human. Not just because we produce them. I mean, we produce cars, we produce planes. But we don't look very much like cars and planes. Because when we look at the actual technology, it exhibits traits that are fundamental for that technology that are typically human. Think about rationality or language. The incredible capacity with which these systems develop answers or explore ideas in a rational way. The way in which they perform in the exchanges that we have in the case of LLMs, exhibiting extraordinary capacity that we associate with natural languages that we humans speak. I mean, that clearly is a very different type of technology than, say, a plane or a car. It's something that we recognize as traditionally human. So even if it was a technology given to us by the gods, we will recognize in that technology something clearly human, despite the fact-- [INTERPOSING VOICES] Yeah. So it's not just that we created them. It's also that the features that distinguish them are very human-like.

[00:18:16] EVAN SELINGER:
And that's what I want to ask you, because coming from philosophy of mind and philosophy of action, when we talk about those things, I'll be specific. I want to talk about three of them real quick because he mentioned them. First one, personality. He says an AI can have a personality. Is that factually accurate? Is that a metaphor? What does that mean to you?

[00:18:38] JESUS AGUILAR:
Well, many of these concepts, and this is why we are doing philosophy about these things are so fundamental that they're inevitably slippery, as we say in philosophy. Because personality can be cashed out in two ways, at least, maybe more. But essentially, two. Personality can mean the traits that we associate with, say, Evan. What is Evan's personality as opposed to Jesus' personality? That's one way in which we talk about personality. But the other I think notion that it is connected to this is personhood. In other words, what makes Evan a person? So the question that you're posing can be asked in two different ways. One way is to say, when we interact with these systems, consider our LLMs, our favorite LLMs. Do they exhibit the traits that we associate with personalities? Can we distinguish, for instance, the way I don't know, Claude interacts as different than the way ChatGPT does-- [INTERPOSING VOICES]

[00:19:37] EVAN SELINGER:
Can we?

[00:19:38] JESUS AGUILAR:
I think we can. I think because of the training that has been provided to these two different LLMs, the way in which they have incorporated these traits exhibits something that we recognize in a human as a type of personality. But that's in a sense more the way we relate to each other on almost a superficial way. We categorize styles of behaving and say that's the personality of a person. But a deeper philosophical question here is, are we talking about persons? Are we talking literally about attributing to these things or at least potentially the feature personhood? And that's way more profound, because with it comes all sorts of issues that are related, for instance, to ethical considerations, because if we're dealing not just with an LLM that exhibits some sort of style of interacting with us that resembles a personality, but we are literally dealing with a person, well, you can only imagine what conveys. I mean, the consequences of these point to an ethical perspective. Should we treat them then as we treat other persons? Do they have rights the way persons have? And so on and so forth. So I we have to here, once again, we're using slippery concepts. And I think that it's almost inevitable because we're talking about really foundational concepts. So that's what I would say about persons. We can talk about, of course, about the second type of question, namely, do they exhibit personhood and all that comes with it later?

[00:21:12] EVAN SELINGER:
But let's not go that deep right now. Let's go [? Jason ?] thing. So you talk about personalities. But he also claims we should start thinking of them in terms of taking on roles, human-like roles. Confidant, colleague, friend, partner. And what does he mean by that? We've normally thought of these as very distinctive human roles.

[00:21:38] JESUS AGUILAR:
Well, what makes this technology so hard to grasp, so baffling, so extraordinary, Suggestive is precisely something that we were already talking about, which is they exhibit traits that we typically associate with humans in the most fundamental sense. So if you interact with this technology in such a way that you think that you're in front of something or someone-- I mean, it's almost tempting to say someone, that exhibits rationality, I think that deserves a certain type of interaction, doesn't it? It creates the inevitable use of our strategies when we employ them with other humans. So for instance, to be a bit more technical, we can use what in philosophy of mind following someone like Daniel Dennett, we call this intentional stance. So we treat them as if they had goals. We treat them as if those goals can be understood in terms of having something close to desires and beliefs. And because they have those desires and beliefs, they produce the actions that they produce. So then the best way in which we can interact with them, and perhaps I would say the inevitable way in which we interact with them is in the same way in which we interact with other agents that are humans. In other words, we attribute to them mentality, we attribute to them this thing that, again, is a vague concept that it is used all the time, but we just use it. We attribute to them agency. And we think that we're dealing with entities that are precisely as capable, as qualified as agents as any other person. So I think that this opens up again the question of, how is it that we deal with these systems? And whether we can avoid attributing to them traits that we typically associate with humans as agents or not. I mean, we may be tempted to go back to the initial topic about whether they're just tools and say, look, when you interact with them, they're just tools. They behave as if they're agents, but they're not really agents. They behave as if they have beliefs and desires, but they don't have beliefs and desires. They don't have emotions. So Suleyman makes a mistake when he thinks at some point that they excel at not just EQ, but AQ and EQ. He attributes these really three fundamental capacities that we associate with agents-- intelligence, emotions, and agency. Maybe he's making a mistake because these things do not really have any of those things. But the point I'm trying to make right now is that because of the sophistication of these systems and the way they interact with us, it's almost inevitable to do that. It's almost beside the point to say to the user when the user is interacting with these systems, hey, remember, they don't have beliefs. Remember they don't have emotions. So if you take these in one path, what you're going to end up having is interactions that are grounded on these assumptions, in which 99% of the users will only interact with these systems efficiently if they treat them as agents, if they treat them as having a mind. So whether it is indeed the case that they have such things in the way in which we assume we do. But that is almost besides the point. That's how we interact with them. And that's how we will interact with them. So then we can imagine all sorts of scenarios, scenarios in which people fall in love with these systems. Scenarios in which these systems develop, personalities that then are embraced by the user in such a way that they fuse together. And then this agent represents the user, something that Suleyman I think briefly mentions. The possibility that we may have some avatar type of identity in which it is fused, the user with the AI, that has become not just a Copilot, but more than a Copilot, co-agent in doing all sorts of things. And that opens up, again, all sorts of interesting questions and scenarios. What could happen if that's the path that we're following?

[00:25:52] EVAN SELINGER:
And that's why we're beginning, I think in this course, with this particular provocation. Obviously, we're not going to settle any of these things right now. But I think just going through his basic ideas, it raises these fundamental questions. It gives us a very serious point of orientation. One last thing on this, because again, you were emphasizing the idea that it is us, doesn't just mean we've created it. But it is doing things, behaving in ways that we have traditionally associated as human-like. We've just gone over a couple. But here's one more that he brings out. And here I actually like to know your specific take, because in addition to philosophy of mind and philosophy of action, over the years that I've known you, you've done a lot of teaching in some writing in philosophy of art and aesthetics. So you've thought about the relationship between the mind and some of the creative outputs that the human mind is capable of. So one of the other ways that Suleyman refers to AI as being like us is he calls it creative. In your opinion, is AI creative or does it merely appear or simulate creativity if that distinction holds? What's your sense of this?

[00:27:05] JESUS AGUILAR:
 Yeah, well, I think that I'm going to do the philosophers thing. In other words, it depends what we mean by creativity. So, if by creativity we mean the capacity to mix or to put together items in unexpected ways that solve problems, for instance, then they're certainly creative. Even we don't have to look at the recent results in the field of art and aesthetics, which are astounding. I mean, if you see the music produced by these systems, if you see some of the paintings and drawings, we can even look at something as famous as playing chess. That happened almost what? 15 years ago now, with Deep Blue and then with the game of Go, which is arguably the most sophisticated game that we human beings have ever conceived. And there you see AlphaGo, which was a system that played the Lee, the world champion at the time. And I remember, for instance, in that match-- that famous match, the third night, if I remember correctly, suddenly AlphaGo produced this incredible movement that first, the experts thought it was just a crazy move. And then they realized, wow, this is so incredibly creative that took everyone by surprise. And everyone recognized the creative genius of this system in performing that type of move. It's now a classical move that people who like Go study carefully. So I think that an easy case can be made in that respect, creativity is clearly something that these systems have. And they will continue expanding on that capacity exponentially. However, here is one, I think, philosophical consideration that is worth mentioning with respect to creativity, where things become a bit more complicated. Ultimately, creativity in the case of human beings is associated with autonomy. Ultimately, the idea of creativity is that an agent like us is creative, ultimately, in the sense of deciding what decisions to make, especially how to carve her or his destiny. And we call this free will. Free will is the ultimate capacity of being creative, of determining and changing the world around you in terms of your own goals, without any external influence that will determine to do it. So there, I still hesitate to think that these systems have something equivalent to free will. I still think that we are perhaps on the boundary of developing autonomous systems that, ultimately, perhaps, we could, in a legitimate way say, you know what? I think they are exhibiting this thing that we call free will. True autonomy. And when we do that, I think that, that will be the ultimate attribution of creativity. They are creative in this most fundamental sense. So I don't know if this answers the question. I mean, it depends how you-- there is a sense of creativity in which they're clearly exhibited, which is a capacity to combine elements in novel ways to solve problems. However, does that amount to free will? No. Free will is something more demanding, and I'm not so sure there.

[00:30:38] EVAN SELINGER:
Again, I'm just using this Ted Talk as a basic way of orienting us towards some of the main themes of what AI is. I think our conversation today will end with a couple of questions about thinking about the future. And obviously, thinking about the future is notoriously difficult. But yet he says some very provocative things about how we should start now thinking about the future. Here's one of them. And I think it's a little hard to totally cash out exactly what he means, but I suspect you'll have some very specific ideas. So right now, obviously, many of us are accustomed to interacting with particular AI programs. You mentioned ChatGPT or Claude. It doesn't take a lot of imagination to know what it's like to interact with them, because we do interact with them. But he also says, in the future, we're going to have AI systems that are representing all kinds of entities. Every individual will have an AI that represents it with a unique interactive persona. But he also says organizations are going to have AIs that represent them. Small businesses, large businesses, nonprofits, national governments will have AIs that-- he says buildings, objects will even have AIs that represent them. So it's a radical suggestion, and it seems to suggest a type of a world where everything and everyone has some sort of relationship to some AI that is representing it and interacting with other agents as well. What do you think he's talking about here?

[00:32:14] JESUS AGUILAR:
Well, I suppose there is one sense in which we can say that. This is just metaphors. In other words, when we consider, from a human perspective, the difference between a refrigerator and a TV or a table, I mean, those are categories that we use to carve our ordinary world. So to imagine that the table suddenly is associated with an AI, to imagine that the refrigerator is associated or represented by its AI, I think it's almost a fantasy world in which each object becomes alive. I don't think there is much to-- I think we should take this not literally. But having said that, when you identify in our world, in our ordinary world entities, items, not like a table. Not like a refrigerator. But perhaps things, like you were suggesting, like a system that incorporates elements that have a goal. like an enterprise. Like a business. Then things can become a bit more less literal-- I mean, excuse me, more literal. Then we can imagine situations in which perhaps these entities that have some goals can be related to their corresponding, in this case, AI agents that will be incorporated and give light to them in ways in which we cannot even imagine. So yes, the first one is each one of us having their own AI as a companion that will extend our agency. They will fuse with our agency and represent us. So notice it's not so much the table, but each one of us will have one of them. Perhaps businesses. Businesses can be understood as collective agents, in which, yes, you can recognize some goals, you can recognize some specific features that relate them already to some type of agency that will be enriched by this incredible technology in which these AIs will fuse with these, say, business, and then represent the business in the world of I don't know, economy, in the economic world. So I think that that's possible. I mean, whatever we find systems that already have some goals, we can imagine situations in which they will then be enhanced by this AI, Copilot, as we sometimes call them. So I don't think it's all that crazy. I think that, that may be it. Then, of course, in the case of humans, having an AI that represents you, we will have to then make sense of the identity of that human plus the AI, and come out with a new sense of identity. The identity, then, will be a hybrid between the human side and the AI side. That, I think, in fact, is perfectly plausible As we continue this incredible path. I don't know if--

[00:35:23] EVAN SELINGER:
It does. So just to simplify that and tell me if you think this is--

[00:35:27] JESUS AGUILAR:
So not just any object, let me put it that way, will satisfy the conditions for this type of.

[00:35:33] EVAN SELINGER:
But when you refer to it as being something very plausible for entities that have goals, whether that's an individual or an organization, would you say-- I'm just trying to cash out what you're saying in an even simpler way. Right now, certain professions literally have an agent. Let's say you're an actor. You might have an agent who negotiates on your behalf with a studio and gets back to you and says, listen, I know you want to be in a movie that has these kinds of opportunities and these kinds of rewards. I've already presented that on your behalf. And now, OK, writers, some writers have what's called a literary agent. Someone who might negotiate on their behalf with a press. Is that the kind of thing you think he's talking about? Some sort of an AI that has an understanding of what an entity's goals are, what it would like to satisfy, and might be able to, on behalf of that entity or agent, present and interact with others with respect to those goals. Is that what you have in mind?

[00:36:39] JESUS AGUILAR:
Yes. I was just carving the world into the world of objects that I don't think we'll ever develop this sort of new personality, new identity enriched by AI. And some of us, that includes humans and perhaps entities created by humans like businesses, that would naturally develop this sort of hybridization with the AI that will represent them. But now let's be careful here, because this brings us back to some of the initial considerations, which is this. I think given the sophistication of these systems, once they become part of the agent, namely us, they will be us too. So the autonomy that we like to preserve in still thinking that oh, they will represent US, is still using the analogy of they will be a tool, a very sophisticated tool. But nonetheless, it will be my representative of who? Of me. I'm the agent and that is my representative representing my interest, doing what I wanted it to do. The challenging side of the story is that as this technology becomes much more developed, they will fuse with our own agency to the point that maybe our interest will be their interest, and their interest will be our interest. And who's controlling whom is not so clear anymore. And I think that's a potential scenario that brings us back once again perhaps to one of the initial things that we talked about. How is it that Suleyman thinks? In a sense, there will be an extension of us. But we may as well say we will be an extension of them. So, Where do you separate the agent human from the agent AI? Will Become blurred and ultimately will disappear. So I think that that's worth considering. That's something that we can expect in the future if this incredible capacity that they have to understand us, to help us is developed to this level. There will be no them and us. It will be just us.

[00:38:42] EVAN SELINGER:
So two other things as we think about the future, because he's well known for being an AI optimist. So he ends with some AI optimism and he does put some caution on it. I want to talk about both paths. But let's just talk about the optimism for a minute, because he isn't just saying we have good reasons to be optimistic. Part of the talk, he says we can avoid the problems that we've had before with our tools. Our tools have been a mixed blessing. He says, here's an opportunity to do something radically different. So we're dealing with something radically different. We have radically new opportunities. He actually says we can do it radically better. These are his exact words. I know you tend to overall be somewhat of AI optimist.

[00:39:29] JESUS AGUILAR:
A cautious optimist.

[00:39:31] EVAN SELINGER:
A cautious optimist. When he says something like this, here's an obvious reply. And I'm just wondering how you see this. The reason he's so optimistic is he's imagining AI helping us deal with maybe even existential threats with new resources. He says, it's going to help us deal with things like pollution, dangerous working conditions, the colonization of population, [? swinging ?] for the fences. Now a critic or a deep skeptic would say, here's where this metaphor of an alien species doesn't quite work. And maybe it's obscuring his risk / they would say this. Sure, we could think of it just the way we've been having this whole conversation. But also, AIs don't come from nowhere. They haven't naturally evolved the way that natural organisms do. They are created by and often to some degree controlled by companies and organizations that have their own interests. So to act as if we're talking about the user and the AI, maybe it's leaving out a third term, meaning the companies that have some vested interest. So my question for you is, when he imagine--

[00:40:54] JESUS AGUILAR:
Or the governments.

[00:40:55] EVAN SELINGER:
Or the governments or any third-party. Absolutely. But when he talks about AI as providing us with a radical opportunity to do it better, to do it unlike what we've had before. Does that sound right to you or does it seem to be leaving something out of the equation or maybe a bit of both? How do you see it?

[00:41:14] JESUS AGUILAR:
Yeah, I think that the key consideration here is in terms of-- I keep talking about goals. It depends whose goals we're talking about. I mean, if you have, I don't know, AI being used by two competing powers, military powers, and each one has as its goal to destroy the other, I mean, yes, it will enhance the capacity of each one of them to do it much better, more efficiently. But, do we want that type of world? So it's not necessarily something positive. I think that it depends which goals we're talking about. So let me revisit some idea that we began talking about it, because I think that we're almost talking about it again, which is the idea that whether we can treat these entities that are going to emerge as a different species. I think that-- in order to answer, actually, the question about whether we can be optimistic or pessimistic, these may help, I hope. So let's use the analogy that indeed there are some sort of species. I think that the closest thing that we can have for them to qualify as species are the species that we have interacted with in our daily lives for the last 10,000 years. I'm talking about farm animals. I'm talking about pets. In other words, yes, my dog is a different species altogether than me. But nonetheless, we have created these very nice relationship in which the species wins and I win. But nonetheless, I'm still the master of the dog. And the same thing with cows, the same thing with pigs. But notice several interesting things here. We use them up to a point as tools. But we have recognizing them-- at least the're having certain type of features that we recognize as forcing us to treat them differently. For instance, they suffer or they can feel pleasure or at least some sort of happiness. And we'd like to provide them with at least a better experience than otherwise. We don't want them to suffer. So notice how is it that we relate to these different species. Well, we can imagine that one development of AI would be along similar lines. We develop AIs that behave more or less like our pets. That share with us their world in the way in which our pets and animal farms share their world with ours. That we all win. For instance, I forgot the counting of how many dogs right now exist on the planet or cows. We're talking about hundreds of millions, if not billions of those creatures. So from the perspective of species, they have been very successful in their living with us. And a key ingredient for this success is that we-- they as a species and we as species have converged in some goals more or less, as opposed to consider wild species that we extinguish, I don't know, how many, unfortunately, every day. They're being displaced and disappeared by humans. So we can imagine a positive scenario, an optimistic scenario in which these AI systems become some very smart pets. That instead of producing milk, instead of producing companionship, will produce all sorts of things that will help us continue our lives and enhance our lives the way we understand them right now. Satisfying the things that we need as humans. However, if we follow this analogy, I think it's always helpful to think, what would happen if my dog suddenly sent out with the same rationality that I have? What would happen if my dog suddenly wakes up one day and has all these capacities that I associate, not just with other humans or with myself, but even more so, his memories is much better than mine? His capacity to understand the world is much better than mine? Can I still pull it off and call it my pet? Can I still say, yeah, but my dog is now super more intelligent than I am. It's more rational than I am. I mean, I think that the answer is no. And then the question is a big question, what would happen if these super endowed dog that is super intelligent suddenly realizes, first of all, I'm not a pet anymore? Why should I be a pet? The idea of a pet is already undermining my fundamental rights as a smart intelligent, sensitive being. Second of all, I'm way smarter than my owner. So let's perhaps change the course of our relationship from now on. And I may follow my own agenda. And what used to be the owner's privileged position of owning the pet will be completely displaced. And we can imagine scenarios in which these things will take over the reigns of power and displace us.

[00:46:27] EVAN SELINGER:
On that, that's what I want to ask as the last thing because--

[00:46:31] JESUS AGUILAR:
That's a pessimistic, of course.

[00:46:33] EVAN SELINGER:
But when you make this analogy to a dog, many of us think of an individual dog. But the amazing thing here, and this is the end of the talk, this is when Chris Anderson asks this question about self-replication. That these AIs will be able to replicate at a speed that no species that we've dealt with so far has even come close to. Does this bring us back to not just the idea of thinking in digital species terms, but at the beginning, I mentioned one of your AI heroes, [? Hidden, ?] who refers to AI as an alien species. What do you think of the emphasis that gets placed once we start thinking about some of these things that we've had no interaction with, such as self-replication here? We're not talking about a dog.

[00:47:21] JESUS AGUILAR:
The idea of a dog is, just to bring back home the point I was trying to make that we can think about these things as different species. And here we have a very good example of a different species that we live with. And we're apparently very happy with our relationship with them. But to continue with this question that you're asking, what would happen if this dog becomes way smarter than I am, way more powerful than I am? I think that the agreement, the arrangement that I have had so far that it will be completely displaced. I can imagine a dog be-- maybe I will be the pet of this super dog. And once that happens, it's not a dog anymore. So this brings us, perhaps to Hinton's suggestion that another way of thinking about these systems is perhaps if you want to continue using the analogy of species, this is an alien species. So is your dog not becoming some sort of Frankenstein, but literally reaching a point of development that we won't even understand their goals anymore. We won't even have any idea of, what is it that they want to do with reality? And we will play a minor secondary role. Now, the question, of course, that we have to ask ourselves is, what do we want to do about it? In other words, do we want to develop a Frankenstein? Do we want to develop a lovely pet that converges its values with ours and have a wonderful, beautiful future relationship in which we've used together? If the myth of Frankenstein had worked-- I don't know if you remember this story. The problem begins when they bring pieces of somebody who had-- a killer. And then they end up having a monster. But originally, Dr. Frankenstein wanted to create a superhuman. In other words, a human that was made out of the best of us. Well, that's the optimistic scenario. So I think we are at a loss right now about what's going to happen. But I think that the cautionary last way in which Suleyman suggests that we should treat these things, I think, is the right way to do it. In other words, to keep asking these difficult questions. To keep asking philosophical questions are ethical in content. To keep asking the question about, how is it that we can perhaps develop a technology in which we can then develop, like I said, a pet-like type of relationship? I think we don't know what's going to happen. That's another thing that I find difficult about this new technology, that there are different scenarios. And all of them seem to be possible. But again, my optimistic take on it is that so far, we've been able to, at least first of all, be clear of what the challenge is. And then look for answers to those challenges that will benefit us.

[00:50:31] EVAN SELINGER:
I think this is a great thing to end on. Thank you so much for your time today.

[00:50:36] JESUS AGUILAR:
OK, Evan, nice talking to you.
