[00:00:03] EVAN SELINGER:
Hey, it's great to talk with you today, Brenda Leong, especially because it's always good to talk to you, but particularly today. In the online Ethics of AI course that I'm teaching, the students are going to be reading a chapter that you, Albert Fox Cahn, and I wrote, the one called "AI Audits-- Who, When, How-- Or Even If?" They're also going to watch a video of the talk that you gave when you came to RIT in person to my in-person Ethics of AI course. And so I see this as a way of helping them know what to focus on. So let's talk about some of the key insights that you have to offer. But also, I want them to get a sense of who you are as not just a theorist, but also a practitioner. So you're currently the director of the AI Division of ZwillGen PLLC. But before that, you were Managing Partner at Luminos.Law. And that was a firm that specialized in AI auditing and testing. And before this, you worked in the nonprofit sector. You were a senior counsel and the director of AI and Ethics at the Future of Privacy Forum, so a lot going on in a career, the nonprofit sector, the for-profit sector. Can you tell us a little bit about this transition, going from one to the other? Like, what were you doing in the nonprofit space, and what are you doing today?

[00:01:23] BRENDA LEONG:
Sure. Thanks so much for having me here today. It's great to talk about what is obviously one of my favorite subjects. So my background as a lawyer has been entirely in the technology, privacy, InfoSec, and now AI space. So I have a lot of different directions that that's gone. I did start out at the Future of Privacy Forum, which is a nonprofit, but is still very commercial data, commercial privacy centered and focused. It's an organization that is supported by private corporations. It's not a lobbyist or an advocacy organization, but it's a policy organization. So it's designed to see what the ongoing challenges of emerging technology are. Specifically, it started obviously around privacy but more broadly today, and over the last decade or so, about data governance in general, about emerging technologies, and one of those being, of course, AI, machine learning kinds of things. So I worked and started the AI machine learning work stream there in the mid-teens, as that was first becoming more of a thing, not so much in the public eye, but in the commercial area. And companies were starting to use these predictive algorithms more. Social media was becoming more prevalent, all those kinds of things. And people wanted to understand the privacy implications of all the data that was being collected and used for that, as well as what other risks and concerns there might be around these new predictive systems. And so did that for several years. And then, again, it was in the nonprofit sphere, but it was in cooperation and coordination with a lot of different commercial companies about what the business impact or legal impacts of those would be. And then left there to go to Luminos.Law, which was a firm started specifically to address the relationship between the policy and legal concerns around these questions and the technical issues, like AI is a computer programming technology. So there are technical limitations. There are technical realities. There are technical capabilities. There are changing/emerging opportunities of what can be done. And trying to balance that with what the regulatory approach to those should be or the legislative approach should be was a growing gap, an area of concern. And so the firm was started specifically to address that. And now that firm has been bought out by this firm, still doing exactly the same thing, basically, day-to-day, helping our clients who are, again, private corporations who either develop, build, design, sell, or operate AI systems, machine learning systems. And now, of course, we have things like, generative AI has entered the scene. And now we're talking about things like agentic AI, is the latest shiny new buzzword, and all kinds of things like that. So anything that has anything to do with these machine learning, either predictive algorithms or generative AI systems, and how they're being used more or less in the commercial space, as opposed to, for example, by governments or in some other capacity is what we do.

[00:04:30] EVAN SELINGER:
And so as a last thing on this, and of course, and just broad strokes, because students are interested in both ethics of AI and responsible AI governance, and I'm sure they're wondering, to what extent are these things similar and different, at least in your experience in the nonprofit and for-profit sectors, like, if you're going to be a professional in these worlds?

[00:04:53] BRENDA LEONG:
Well, so the introduction of any new technology, of course, raises new ethical or moral or even just responsible business questions from the point of view of the companies building and operating them, the people that use them, the customers being impacted by them. And for the most part, technology, when it's introduced, including AI, is still subject to all of the existing laws that already exist, so like anti-discrimination laws, consumer protection laws, product safety laws. Those things all still apply and have to be interpreted and applied and understood in the context of these new technologies, which is not always easy. There are a lot of challenges to doing that. But in addition, obviously, if you move from a horse to a car, you're still in transportation. But you have a whole different set of details of what you want your safety rules to look like or your speed limits and things like that. And so same with AI. We have different things that we need to look at now because we're doing things with AI and it has impacts that are different than a traditional computer program or a traditional way of doing something that wasn't automated at all. And so we now have all these emerging laws about that. And so from my experience in the nonprofit side, you're looking at it more broadly in, what are the commonalities of these challenges? And how can we develop either best practices or ethical standards or responsible frameworks or whatever verbiage like that you want to choose but at a very generalized level to figure out a way to offer steps, baselines, benchmarks for companies, or for whoever is using these tools, to be able to do so and make choices about how to do it responsibly in accordance with their own values as an organization. And then now, in the private sector as a law firm, we're doing that client by client. So one client may have a higher risk threshold for certain kinds of risks than others do. And so we're going to help them write policies and procedures to manage their AI systems in accordance with that risk. But of course, the law is going to put boundaries on how much risk they can accept or impose on a consumer, for example, and what kind of protection safety has to be in place. And so it gets a little bit more into the details and the specifics of this program being used in this context with this end user in mind, as opposed to a general expectation that AI would be used for good or not for bad, or whatever other very detailed terminology you want to use on it.

[00:07:32] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's now get into AI audits, which turns out to be surprisingly complicated and interesting. And it's so complicated and interesting that we've got to start with the fundamental question. And I think students might even find this thing surprising. They might assume there was a standard definition of an AI audit, but part of what you point out is that's not even the case. Why are there multiple definitions?

[00:07:55] BRENDA LEONG:
There's multiple definitions for a couple reasons. One is there's not a standardized application of AI. AI can be very different in scale and scope and content and context. And so something that's predicting credit scores is going to be something that's very different than diagnosing medical conditions, that's going to be very different from something that's scanning resumes for employment. So in one sense, it's going to be more challenging because of AI is such a big umbrella for so many different things. And to audit or inspect those systems is going to take a lot of variation in the same way that we don't regulate those things the same by many other standards as well. But also, because AI as a functional technology is changing and adapting and developing so quickly, there's not enough standards or similarity for us to say, this is what an audit will look like every time, all the time. But there are some growing consensus around general agreements of certain aspects of what an audit would look like. That obviously sounds very vague and still is, but it's more than we had. It's moving in a direction that has some observable commonalities, and getting to what we think a good audit of an AI system might be is progressing is the best guess I can say.

[00:09:28] EVAN SELINGER:
So to the extent that you can, how would you just define an AI audit, just from a purely definitional level?

[00:09:35] BRENDA LEONG:
So I think there's two primary categories of the audit and, I think, of an audit as a general definition. One is you're auditing the process of whatever is being done, the function, the business case, the purpose, which, for examples I just gave, you're issuing credit scores to people. And so the overall process of collecting data, deciding what the weights will be, deciding what factors will be included as part of making that calculation, income, education level, whatever kinds of things, past debt that get included in that. And then applying whatever analysis you're doing, which, in the past, was based on some statistical analysis and modeling, is now possibly being done with a more different kind of statistical modeling that's an AI machine-learning-driven process. And then whatever that process spits out goes through whatever review or filter or output before it gets flashed to the consumer as, here's your credit score. So that whole process, start to end, needs to be understood and inspected or evaluated or monitored because there are a lot of different points clearly in that process that create risk or reflect decisions that are being made. And those need to be reviewed and documented and challenged. But the other version of audit, which is narrower and, I think, sometimes maybe what other people think about when they think about an audit, is just that middle part, just the part that's being done by the machine learning system of, what data is directly going in? Again, what all of my credit background features or data that's going in, what is it doing with that data? And then, what is the actual output, so this initial score that may or may not be my final actual credit score, but it is the output of the algorithm? And that, in and of itself, is what a lot of people are thinking of as an AI audit now, because that's the part that's new. That's the part that we haven't understood or haven't used before and, therefore, don't understand exactly how it operates compared to those other statistical models that might have been used in the past or pencils and papers and calculators or however we did that. We want to make sure that it's operating in some sort of understandable, transparent, observable, fair way that we can be confident in as consumers or just as business people generally.

[00:12:08] EVAN SELINGER:
Would you say the things that you just mentioned are the main reasons why now companies and organizations are requiring AI audits?

[00:12:17] BRENDA LEONG:
Yeah, so there's definitely companies that want AI audits because they want to observe clearly objective evaluation of their model for their own business use. For example, they want to make sure it's doing what it says it's doing because, if it's not, in the long run, they're going to lose customers. Or their business isn't going to be successful. Obviously, the other reason is because there are laws being passed that say you have to do an AI audit. And so companies who might not have chosen to do one otherwise, or would have done it a little differently or something, are going to have to do it because there's a law. So responsible governance of AI requires it in either direction, because you have to be in compliance with whatever legal regime you are working in and operating your business in. But also, just to responsibly operate your model, you have to know how it works and what it's doing. And can you validate that it's actually doing what you say it's doing and then doing so in a fair or sustainable way?

[00:13:14] EVAN SELINGER:
And you've made the point that we need to think of audits as a necessary and essential step, but it's not sufficient for good governance. What does that point mean?

[00:13:25] BRENDA LEONG:
Well, necessary, because I've said, these models are creating a very significant aspect of any of these overall systems and functions. And so we need to be able to have confidence in them, "trustworthy AI--" again, one of the buzzwords out there-- to determine, are these things that we're willing to have be part of generating our credit scores or our health diagnoses or our employment decisions-- we want to be able to know and be confident in the way that they operate and their outcomes. But also-- I'm sorry. I lost the thread of your question on that one. Could you tell me again?

[00:14:00] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah, you've made the point that these audits are a necessary feature--

[00:14:04] BRENDA LEONG:
Oh, right.

[00:14:04] EVAN SELINGER:
[INAUDIBLE]

[00:14:05] BRENDA LEONG:
So they're necessary for those reasons that I just said because you have to be able to say what you're doing. They're not sufficient, because that model does always operate in some kind of larger flow. So the model itself might be able to be tested and validated, and we feel pretty confident that it's doing what it says. It's doing pretty reliably. It's translating language. It's making cancer diagnoses. It's operating an autonomous vehicle, and it's actually doing those things pretty well. But then there's that bigger arc that we talked about, about design choices at the beginning and outputs and how they're actually being used and implemented on real people. So an example of that is facial recognition technology. The technology part, that middle part has gotten very, very good, despite headlines and some of the prior findings about how bad-- and it was. It was very, very bad and very, very biased across demographic groups. The technology part of that has solved a lot of those problems and is actually very accurate across a lot of demographic groups in certain conditions, et cetera, et cetera. But the technology is getting better is the point, is getting very accurate. But how that technology is used still raises a lot of concerns. So it could be used to get into a secure facility as one way of asserting your identity into your work building or whatever, and maybe that's something that we're OK with. But we don't want it tracking us down the street, jumping from ATM camera to ATM camera in real time and tracking us or identifying us at public protests or things like that. So there's the technology piece of, does it do what it's supposed to do? Maybe frequently, yes. But then there's the context of how it's being used. So just auditing that central part is not going to be sufficient to say, is this overall system ethical or desirable or legal in how it's being used overall?

[00:15:58] EVAN SELINGER:
And you've made another really interesting point, and this is something people are struggling with in the AI space. What resources, what comparisons do we have from the past to understand these very novel things that are happening? And you've compared AI audits to audits we're more familiar with, financial audits. How does this comparison help us understand what's going on?

[00:16:19] BRENDA LEONG:
So I do think it's useful, just because, as humans, we like to look for patterns and precedent and feel like something-- so something we can compare to and understand so that we can get a better feel for what we're doing now. And in the early days of the 20th century, as the industrial age advanced, and companies grew, and business got more international and complex, and so forth, there were not standardized rules about financial accounting for those businesses or for how to inspect and assert that they were being done legally, sufficiently, fairly, or whatever other measure it might have been. And yet, people were still looking at the books, looking at a company's books to see, how do you operate? And how are you keeping track of your income and your outgo and things like that? And those expectations and agreement of what that should look like did slowly grow in the same way with consensus. And then around the, I think, 1950s, in the world of accounting, developed something called the generally accepted accounting principles, which became the baseline for how people kept their books. They would all do their accounting in more or less the same way according to standards. And with that in place, that provided some structure then, for now all the people had a way to look at a company's books in the same way, from the same perspective, using the same standards. And now you could have an apples-to-apples comparison across companies. And then eventually, that evolved to the point of the people doing the looking needed to have a certain amount of training and certification as an auditor so that they were all trained to do that same thing in the same way, in a reliable and trustworthy way. And then over time, in addition to those generally accepted accounting principles, other sorts of standards grew around those as well. Again, as businesses became more complex, more international, and other aspects continued and still continue to change in the world of finance, audits have continued to adapt to what those needs are. So I think that it makes a useful way of understanding that even as the certainty of a set of thresholds is not present yet, we can still find ways to look at things and find some objective way to evaluate and understand them. And then over time, as I said, we can reach consensus, get some of those best practices to develop. And probably, eventually, there will be some sort of generally accepted AI audit process and probably some sort of accreditation or certification for the people doing the auditing. We do audits right now. We don't have to have any special license to do that. We just say that we do them, and we show how we do them to the people who want us to do it. And we have to prove our worth on the ground, as it were, and say, this is why we say this is useful to you and sufficient to meet your current needs. If the government eventually, or any set of bodies, international standards bodies, comes out with a process and a way of doing audits, we would probably adapt ours to match that or to align with that so that we can now say, OK, we're doing audits in accordance with an ISO standard or an IEEE standard or a NIST standard, or whatever that might be, as it becomes more formalized over time. But it doesn't mean we have to sit around and wait for that. We're operating in the real world, and people want to know how these models are operating now. So we need to find a way, even in the interim.

[00:19:39] EVAN SELINGER:
So as these standards and best practices are emerging, there's a number of sticking points. And I just think it would be helpful to just talk about three of them, just so people have a sense of OK, what are some of the issues that people are trying to figure out exactly how to test that, how to do best and appropriately. So one issue has to do with data. There's discussions about are we using training data or testing data or historical data. There are questions about who's conducting the audit. Is this being done internally? Is it being done externally? And then there's frequency questions like, OK, even if we get all of this working, how often do we need to do it? What are these three issues, and why are they drawing so much attention?

[00:20:20] BRENDA LEONG:
Yeah so I think those are three core questions, maybe not the only core questions, but definitely three of the top ones. What type of data is obviously very important. How the model is trained, how it's tested and evaluated, and then how it's actually operated in the real world, in an AI context, is almost always related to the data, the data that's available, the data that it generates. What sort of rules and protections are there, or limitations on that data? So there's not going to be a single answer to that question. Each audit or each vertical of audit, the scale and scope and size of the system, what it's being used for, maybe what industry it's in-- it's probably going to have its own answers to that, which I'm sure will overlap greatly between them. But we'll all have some of their specific unique aspects that apply to finance versus health care. But it is a core question to ask in the context of data. And as we see in the news and things like that, even for generative AI, people are asking, what is the data that is being used to train these? And how can we have reliance on the outcomes based on knowing what that data is? And oh, by the way, are there concerns about the data? Like, are there copyright of the data that's being used that's being violated? And so there's these adjacent questions. It's not really so much about the operation of the model, but that are important in the overall context of using it, that there might be other impacts and protections around the data. And it is important to remember that that question involves the data that's going in and training. It also involves the data that's coming out and how that's being used and stored, protected, forwarded, sold, whatever. So that's the data--

[00:22:11] EVAN SELINGER:
Data is people internal or external?

[00:22:14] BRENDA LEONG:
Yeah, so who should conduct? And the answer to that is probably, all of the above at different times. So the idea of an audit, by definition, means not the people who built and operate the model. It's like you can't proofread your own paper. You need to get somebody else, even if they not very much about what you're writing about. If they know about papers and footnotes and references and English grammar, then they can probably read your paper and give you some useful insights that you would miss because you're too close to it. So just like that for AI models, internally, whoever is building and designing and testing and operating the model needs some fresh eyes to ask those questions and identify the gaps and things like that. And very importantly in AI, that needs to represent a diverse perspective, in other words, people with different educational backgrounds, people with different work skills. A marketing person is going to look at how an AI model operates and its outcomes very differently from a designer or a programmer, very differently than from the lawyer, and so on. So each of them is going to have their own set of ways of thinking about a model that are going to be important, and so having those external reviews. But more formally as an audit, it can be internal to the organization but, again, external to the product team. It just needs to be somebody who knows enough to question the model. There also do need to be external audits. That's more of the regulatory space. The company needs to do the internal ones for their own responsible governance purposes, again, to make sure the business model is functioning the way it's supposed to, and also to set themselves up for compliance. But from a compliance standpoint, I think most people would agree, it's never going to be enough for a company to self-certify that their audit works well. They're going to have to test it and document and then have somebody else come in and look at that testing and documentation and probably conduct some sort of corollary testing of their own to say, yes, we can validate that your model works at this level of confidence or this level of fairness or whatever that might be. And so that's going to be related to that. And how many of those groups of people do it is related to the last question of how often, which is to say the higher the risk of the use case, the more important it is to have those different layers of audits, and the more important it is to do it more frequently. So if you have something that's running hundreds of thousands of iterations per day, for example, fraud detection on a credit card brand that's running literally hundreds of thousands of transactions every day, that's a very fast-paced, high amount of data going in, coming out, processing. And whatever your AI is doing on analyzing for fraud or analyzing for other patterns in that data relative to consumer behavior, whatever it might be, you're going to want to keep an eye on that model, so to speak, in a very real-time way. So a formal audit, full-fledged formal audit may be just quarterly, but you probably want some sort of monitoring and oversight that's kicking out some sort of output, weekly or even daily, depending on the specifics. But a documented audit, probably at least quarterly, for something that's not quite as fast-paced or high risk, it could be biannually in some systems. It could even be annually. But it would need to be tied to the level of risk of the system, How severe is the impact if something goes wrong? and then also the frequency and pace of the system. So that implicates how likely those things are to happen in real time in a shorter term, so again, not the same answer for every model or system but something that would need to be answered in context.

[00:26:03] EVAN SELINGER:
And so when the rubber hits the road, one of the things that we talk about in our chapter is we give an example where we try to see what is actually happening in the real world. And we talk about New York City. It had a very pioneering law, Local Law 144. It got praised. It got criticized. Why both? What were they trying to achieve? Who was happy with it, and who wasn't happy with it?

[00:26:27] BRENDA LEONG:
So I love this law. I think it's a great law in the fact that it exists and what it's doing and what it's trying to do. I am happy to quibble a little bit about some of the specifics. But overall, this is the first and still the only law that has put that rubber on the road in the sense of, here is exactly what we mean by audit. Here is the questions you're going to ask, the data that you're going to look at, what your output of your audit needs to look at. Here's what the table needs to say. Here's your columns. Here's your rows, and this is where you're going to post it so that people can see it, very detailed guidance, and the only law to date that has done that. And so because it gets down to that level of detail, it is, of course, controversial because the reason it's hard to be that detailed is because there's so much difference of opinion. What statistical tests are you running? What things are you measuring? What output should you be worried about and tracking? What data or process questions should you be asking? And they answered all those things, for better or worse, in one direction or another. And that's what you have to do to comply with that audit. So I think it's great from that point of view because it really demonstrates, here's one way of approaching it, one set of tests you could run, one set of outputs that you could post that give you at least some level of observability and transparency on these systems. In this context, it's AI systems that are being used in an employment context. And they have to be updated annually. So it is a law that, again, gives you, right down to the period, what you have to do. And that's what, at the end of the day, we're eventually going to have to have, whether it's in law or in some sort of subsequent regulation to support a law and this guidance, international standards, whatever. We need that level of detail. And it may not end up looking exactly like that law, but it will probably be the same approach. It's just those little details do matter very much.

[00:28:16] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah, so some of the criticism has been about some of the details, and one could have a conversation all day long about how to best implement them. And some of the criticisms have been more poignant. They've actually been aiming at the very nature of an AI audit. So in the book chapter that we have, there is a third author that we brought in, Albert Fox Cahn. And he's coming at this issue from what he considers to be a civil liberties point of view. And he raises the concern of audit watching. We've heard before about things like greenwashing. Now we're hearing audit watching. What is this concern, and what should we make of it?

[00:28:53] BRENDA LEONG:
I mean, I think this is in common with any sort of regulatory framework, where there is always the possibility of seeking to achieve apparent compliance with a standard without actual substantive value at the implementation level, in other words, checking off the boxes to get by and not get in trouble without actually carrying through on the spirit of what the law's intended, the protections, and safety, and so forth it's implied. And that is certainly true. That can certainly happen. We see that all the time in all kinds of product safety and other kinds of systems where people play the system or do minimal amounts of effort of whatever they have to do just to meet compliance requirements without truly making their products safe. So will there be companies using Local Law 144 or the future corollary versions of it in the EU AI Act or Colorado or anywhere else? Probably. Almost certainly, there will be companies that do that. But the question is, does that make it not valuable to still have those standards? Because many companies will actually do compliance. In other words, they will actually maybe not go way above and beyond. But they will legitimately test their system and say, OK, is it meeting this standard? Am I doing what I'm supposed to do? Can I demonstrate that? Did I document that? And therefore, they will be more effective than they would have been without it, or more safe than they would have been without it. So the fact that some people are going to probably try to cheat or game the system, to me, is not a reason not to have a system. And I think the concern and it's not an invalid concern is to say that if a company does game the system audit wash by going through the motions and doing the minimum, then we're going to have people hurt because they're going to rely on those systems that are not really trustworthy. And again, that's probably true. But the question is, if we don't put those protections and systems in place, aren't we going to be hurt anyway because there won't be any standards or any way for us to have some sort of objective review or ability to rely on things? So as you and I have talked before, we compare it to other sorts of regulatory regimes. I rely on the fact that there are food safety standards, that things that have to be transported in refrigerated units have to be kept stored below a certain temperature for the entire part of their journey until they're sold in a store. I know that those things don't always happen, either by accident or intent. They get compromised. But overall, I feel pretty confident buying a package of hamburger at my grocery store that I'm not very likely going to be physically hurt by that. That's not to say I couldn't be. We get bad lettuce. We get outbreaks of things. But on the whole, we have a really reliable, pretty good sense of safety in our food. Same for our transportation. Same for our energy grid. Same for other kinds of regulated systems where there will always be accidents, errors, or malfeasance. But there will also be a pretty high threshold of reliance and confidence that is earned because those standards are in place. So that's my response to Albert. He knows that. We've had that conversation. And it's good to have people like him pushing back and saying, the standards need to have teeth. They need to matter. There need to be inspections. There need to be fines. I agree with all of that. I just don't agree that because some people are going to gain them, that we shouldn't have them at all.

[00:32:31] EVAN SELINGER:
So on that, let's end here by thinking about a couple of things real quick about the future. So going back to that comparison between AI audits and financial audits, as you point out, financial audits didn't standardize overnight. They took time to develop. So we're going forward. We have some base level ideas. We've had some bits of sticking point. What are top of line thoughts for, how should we go forward? What are some of the best ways we could move forward?

[00:32:58] BRENDA LEONG:
Well, especially from the point of view of your students in the class, I think that you guys are talking about the ethical approach to this of, what's the right way to do these things? I think there's going to be a lot of call for that conversation to be happening because, again, there's this balance between the technical assessment and review, and then the contextual assessment and review. So to take the recent case of TikTok and all the controversy over that, the controversy was never about whether TikTok worked. And there is a low level of controversy about whether the algorithm was exploitative or whether it was bad for you or whether it was presenting disinformation. And that's an important conversation. I don't mean to minimize that. But most of it was about the fact that it was owned by a company headquartered in China that is subject to the Chinese government's ability to get that data. And so it was much more about, what other risks were created by using that kind of system? And I'm not here to say good or bad about any actions for or against TikTok, it's just a very recent case study that we can look at. If we had audited the TikTok model to say, is it generating reliably popular outputs for users, that's one way of measuring it. But the other way of measuring it includes that idea of, where's the data coming from, and where is it going? And what's the output being used for, and who has access to it? And that's what made, at least at the governmental level, many people uncomfortable because of the risk that was contextual for that. So in the future, I think we're going to see more of that. We're going to see, not only does the model work, can we have trust and confidence in its outputs for the math of it. But also, how is that being used? And can we have fairness and confidence in that? And some of it won't be as obvious as that, because some of the misuse is by the company operating it. So the EU AI Act calls out, prohibited systems include something that's exploitive or manipulative use of data. So we have this idea that people shouldn't be taken advantage of, because a company has so much data and information about them that it can literally manipulate them based on that data without their awareness and knowledge, which is a lot different than just saying targeted advertising or something. So those are the things I think we're going to be trying to be concerned about, which, again, is not always about whether the technology operates correctly as technology, but more about how it's being used and who gets to make those decisions. And those are questions that don't have easy answers that we need lots of smart people talking about, like your students.

[00:35:42] EVAN SELINGER:
And so to end on that, since you've come from, again, the nonprofit space, you're in the private sector, you're having conversations with both, even to this day, what kind of skills do you think students should be focusing on as they want to enter into these spaces and have conversations and work with these people? And also, for you going forward, what are you excited to be working on today?

[00:36:04] BRENDA LEONG:
I think skills-wise, we all need to be educated and informed users and consumers. Just regular people out in the real world today know a lot more about the fact that they have personal data and that there are such a thing as privacy concerns than they did 20 years ago or 10 years ago. They don't probably know everything they need to know, but they're getting that literacy, privacy literacy, data literacy, just from having lived in the world and reading headlines. Everybody needs that for AI. We need some AI literacy. The EU AI Act calls for this. And I think one of the most valuable things we could do-- one of the reasons that I continue to make public talks and do a lot of engagement is I want people to understand both the incredible capability and the very real limitations of these technologies, and be aware of that so that they are an educated consumer of them, and don't either get taken advantage of, overly rely on them, or miss out on the opportunities that the technology might offer for them because of just not understanding enough about what's going on. So as these get incorporated in more and more things, I think just really, truly having people understand what the realities are of some of these, which is controversial enough in itself to even say it that way. There will be people who argue about it. But the more you can dive in on your own and then be able to explain it to others, I think the more valuable it will be. I think the other important thing is just to keep a really open mind, not to be so pro-technology that you get caught up in the hype and the excitement every time, but also not to be so dismissive or cynical that you write all of it off as dangerous and terrible because, of course, reality usually is somewhere in the middle. And that's why trying to have a better understanding and keep up with those things and be able to make those distinctions for yourself and then be able to spread that in your circles and in your world, in your business or your company or whatever-- if you're the person that people go to ask about AI because you seem to know a lot about it, that makes you a really valuable resource to try to make people both educated and realistic about how they should be thinking about it.

[00:38:10] EVAN SELINGER:
And then for you, what's exciting and ahead? I mean, you mentioned agentic AI. That's the big shiny thing. Are companies like your company going to be looking into, how can the companies that are making them reduce the risk of these agents doing things that cause unnecessary risk?

[00:38:28] BRENDA LEONG:
There's going to be a lot of people looking at that. It's not a term I actually really love at this point, because I don't actually think the agentic AI is more agentic-- [CHUCKLES] more of an agent than things really are. I think it gives it too much, I don't know, contextual uniqueness that it doesn't really earn yet. But it is an interesting idea as we incorporate this more in our lives to figure that out. I love what I do because every day is different. And every day, you feel like you finally have a pretty good handle on this or that. Something changes. The technology changes. New capabilities roll out once we first felt like we were starting to understand generative AI systems, like a cloud or ChatGPT or something. And then they started combining the images and the text together. And so now you have multimodal generative AI systems, which was a whole new level for testing and understanding a whole new level of thing. And now we're putting it interactive with predictive models and making these agents, theoretically, who combine capabilities from different AI systems. And so now we have to understand how they're coordinated and operating and figure that out. And by the time we get our arms around that, something else will be out there. So you have to be ready to have that pace of change and be able to adapt and keep looking at new things because there's never a slow spot or a plateau. But if you are the kind of person that enjoys that, or just understands that that's the way the world is, and you'd rather be in the flow than washed away by it, then that's a good place to be. And that's what I enjoy about it.

[00:39:58] EVAN SELINGER:
Thanks so much, Brenda. This was incredibly illuminating, as always.

[00:40:03] BRENDA LEONG:
All right, thanks so much.
