[00:00:02] EVAN SELINGER:
OK. Well, it is so great to talk with you today, Rosalie Waelen. And--

[00:00:08] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Likewise.

[00:00:09] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah. I'm so happy that you're here because in this ethics of AI course that I'm teaching, the students aren't just going to read one, they're going to read two of your articles. They're going to read "Why AI ethics is a critical theory" and "The ethics of computer vision in overview in terms of power." And our conversation today is really meant to help them better understand your ideas and why these two articles are very important contributions to AI scholarship. But before we even get into them, I think it's important that students get a sense that there's a person behind the ideas. And so I want to have them get a little sense of who you are. So before your current position, you actually got a PhD in AI ethics at the University of Twente. What led you to do that?

[00:00:54] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Yeah. Thank you. So I studied philosophy and applied ethics, so my background is as a philosopher, not a computer scientist or AI engineer. But during my time as a student, I already developed an interest in artificial intelligence. And I also knew that I wanted to do a PhD in the field of applied ethics because, well, combine my interest in philosophy with my interest in contemporary societal issues. So I saw this job opening for a PhD position in Twente, as is often the case in Europe, at least, that it's predefined PhD topics within bigger projects, and this one was about the ethics of speech, text, and image analysis, which seemed like a perfect fit for me. So I applied, and I got the position. And it's funny, they used that term ethics of speech text and image analysis, which now sounds odd. But in a way, that was ethics of generative AI. So I started using the term AI ethics along with how the field developed, and it became more of a common label. And I decided to focus on computer vision. And maybe could have or should have focused on text generation instead, but yeah. So that's how I ended up in Twente. And once I started the PhD, I became really interested in methodological questions, actually, because there weren't really many established approaches for AI ethics yet. Because as a field of applied ethics, it was incredibly new. So that's how I ended up writing about critical theory and power, which we're going to discuss today.

[00:02:34] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah. OK. So you were in this from the ground floor coming up with ideas as the very field of AI ethics was being created. And now today, you're currently working at the sustainable AI lab at the University of Bonn. So how are things going today? What are you working on?

[00:02:53] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Yeah. So now I'm a postdoc here at the Bonn Sustainability Lab. And what we try to do at the lab is look at the infrastructure behind AI, so not at specific AI applications. We ask what resources are needed to develop and use AI. What types of labor are part of this supply chain, as you can call it, and what kind of structural effects that the technology has in society? And so to answer those questions, you need to analyze and critique power relations in society. So I think in that sense, my work here on sustainable AI still very much fits with what I try to do during my PhD.

[00:03:31] EVAN SELINGER:
 Well, that's great. OK. So now let's get into some of the big ideas in both of these articles, which obviously sound like they have a lot of continuity with what you're currently doing. So both articles, they're taking place in framed within a school of philosophy called critical theory. And I think a lot of students probably in this course haven't heard of critical theory before. And for today, we'll just talk about just the basics. So I know it can be a little bit hard to just summarize things that quickly. But in your opinion, what is critical theory all about? And in your writings, you suggest that power and emancipation are central concepts in this tradition. So if you can talk about this.

[00:04:16] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Sure. So well, there's two ways to refer to critical theory. We can say there's critical theory with capital CT, which refers to the Frankfurt School tradition. So that originated at the Institute for Social Research in Frankfurt, Germany in the 1920s. And thinkers related to this school of thought are Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer, Marcuse, Walter Benjamin, you name it. And many of them had to flee Europe because they were Jewish, and also ended up in the United States. So then we have now, and now still critical theorists in this capital city sense, both in Germany and in the United States. But we can also think of critical theory with a small c and t, which then would refer to any approach or theory that shares the general characteristics of the Frankfurt School of critical theory also has, which I describe as being an emancipatory or, sorry, yeah, an emancipatory goal, a method that's called immanent transcendence, which basically means that there's no predefined ideal of what we want society to be like. We, based on the way how things are right now, the status quo, we try to criticize that and move forward from there to realize that emancipatory goal. And we do that by analyzing power relations or power dynamics. So those characteristics of this Frankfurt School tradition, and there's a lot of work done within that tradition, also resonate with other theories and approaches which are popular today like decolonial theory and feminism. So yeah, that's critical theory in a nutshell, basically.

[00:06:13] EVAN SELINGER:
Well, that's super helpful. And you mentioned a number of philosophers who were central to that tradition coming off the ground. Obviously, they were writing way before there was a focus on [INAUDIBLE]. What are the kinds of things that they were writing about and why do you think this tradition feels so relevant today, particularly as you're writing about AI?

[00:06:38] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Yeah, thank you. So they were very much influenced with the Frankfurt School of critical theory, that is, very much influenced by work of Marx. Often, people say the term critical theory is Marxism in disguise, but they were also influenced by Kant, Hegel, Freud, Nietzsche and what this first generation, we could say, that started off the Frankfurt School tradition was very much interested in was the economy of capitalism and, in that sense, how it related to industrialization. So how capitalism related to technology in a way. But then that interest in technology disappeared a little bit with later generations. Like Habermas, who was also a very known name, who we could call second generation critical theorist. So we find that in critical theory today, they're not discussing technology so much anymore with contemporary critical theory and already Habermas. But that was a big topic actually for first generation critical theorists. So I think in that sense, we can go back to what they were saying and see how that applies to technology today and its relation also to capitalism today, because that's something that they were particularly interested in.

[00:07:58] EVAN SELINGER:
 Yeah, that's great. And I think your work is particularly helpful, and we'll talk about this right now, in saying, hey, there are a lot of ideas in this tradition, but it's possible to focus on a few of the most important ones if we're going to analyze AI. And you help direct our attention to something very specific. You say, if we're going to talk about power, which is so central to critical theory, we can be more specific. We have a toolkit. And you, in fact, break power down into four different types, and you give them very specific labels. You call one dispositional power, and you call another episodic power. Then there's systemic power, and constitutive power. And I think since students are going to get into both of your articles and these ideas are found in both, it would be incredibly helpful just to start, what are each of these types of power?

[00:08:53] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Yeah. Well, let me start by saying power is a very broad concept, so it's really difficult to define. And yet, it's used so much. So that's why I chose this so-called pluralistic approach to power where I combine different ways in which power is used. So it's four notions, like you said. The first, dispositional power, means that power can be a disposition or ability that we have. And not just any ability, of course, but the ability to bring about significant outcomes. So, for example, with dispositional power, I am able to make decisions or take the actions that I need to make or take in order to live my life the way that I want to, which is very closely related to the notion of autonomy, self-rule, and also to the notion of empowerment. People are empowered when they gain dispositional of power and disempowered when they lose it. Then the second notion is episodic power. Episodic power is a relational notion of power. So it's not about having the power to do something, but having power over another person. So A has power over B. And as the term already suggests, episodic power refers to specific instances or episodes in which power over others is exercised. So it's not about the power relation per se, but it's about a specific moment in which power is exercised. For example, in the form of coercion, force, manipulation, through authority, something like that. Then there's systemic power, which is also a relational notion of power. But here, it's not the concrete exercise of power, but the potential to exercise power that matters. Because when we look at systemic power, we want to study the different structures of power in an institution or in society. The different structures of power relations, and also what enables them and what changes them and so on. And then there's constitutive power, which relates to the Foucauldian understanding of power, Michelle Foucault, a French philosopher. And he focused a lot on the fact that power doesn't only destruct, it doesn't only keep us from doing things, but it also constructs. So it also creates something by-- in power relations, we're not only forbidden to act a certain way, but we're also moved to change our behavior. And that behavior change or how our identity changes because of power relations, that's constitutive power.

[00:11:33] EVAN SELINGER:
This is incredibly helpful. And I think in your article where you talk about computer vision, it becomes even more applied. Because you take each of these categories, and you're able to show how they relate. Can you just give us a quick example for each of these four categories, how we can use them to understand something in computer vision?

[00:11:52] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Yeah. Well, for computer vision, one big application is surveillance. So we, of course, already have cameras surveillance, but computer vision can automate this and can increase the possibilities of surveillance. And so it can be used to exercise power. If you take the example of an office, I'm currently sitting in an office. Mine is not very high tech, as you can see from the phone in my background and my headset. But in modern offices, computer vision-facilitated surveillance is already used, for example, to see whether employees start work in time or spend enough time at their desk. And there might be repercussions when they don't. So in that example, computer vision is used to coerce workers to come in at a certain time. And that's episodic power. But such use of computer vision also changes the power relation between an employer and an employee, or between different employees, which has to do with systemic power. And then this use of computer vision also might change how I behave at work or how somebody in an actual modern office behaves at work, how you relate to your coworkers, how you relate your own identity to your profession, and that has to do with the constitutive lens of power. So those are quick examples.

[00:13:25] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah. Great--

[00:13:26] ROSALIE WAELEN:
And you can see the differences. They're all related, but they're different elements of power that come into play in this example. And when we think about dispositional power, for example, I always like to use the example of ChatGPT, because so many people are using that nowadays. And I think many, many of us also feel empowered by it or by other chatbots. For example, in my case, I don't really use ChatGPT to write texts, but I live in Germany nowadays and I'm still learning the language. So it can be really empowering to have AI help me write emails in German, because it enables me to live my life here in this country. So it really supports my autonomy. But at the same time, I think-- well, that's an example of an empowering element of ChatGPT. But at the same time, these generative AI tools of disempower us because we become so reliant on them. So we no longer have this skill-- learn the skill to express ourselves in written texts, which is, I think, very crucial, valuable. And in that sense, the technology can be disempowering. So this example has to do with dispositional power.

[00:14:44] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah. So we have these four concepts, and they are applicable to a range of technologies. And you've just given great examples in computer vision. Since this is an ethics of AI class, I think another important thread I want to pull out, because you make a lot of connections in your articles, how do we understand these ideas about power in relation to the concepts that people often use when talking about AI ethics? People talk about fairness and transparency and accountability. What is the relation? Are you suggesting that these main AI ethics concerns really were about power, but using different vocabularies? Are you translating this, or are you making the suggestion that talking about power this way changes the conversation?

[00:15:35] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Yeah. In my article, "Why AI ethics is a critical theory," I indeed suggest that AI ethics and all these different principles that are associated with it are implicitly and fundamentally about power. But that argument or observation, if you want to call it that, would not be worth anything if it did not also change the conversation. We should make explicit, I think, this concern with power and autonomy and emancipation, which I think is already implicit in these different AI ethics principles that are used. So I think it would improve debates about AI ethics to make that conversation about power explicit or that concern with power. First of all, because I think it helps discussions over different definitions of principles, because a lot of the debate, at least the academic debate, is about, OK, well, what do we mean with fairness? It can mean a lot of different things. So by making the concern with power and autonomy explicit, that might help these conversations. I also think it would make it easier to balance and compare different concerns, because that's another problem that we find in AI ethics debates. That if there's a concern with privacy, but also with transparency, how are we going to balance those two? Because they might clash. And when we say, well, both have the same goal, namely to empower us as users, that might help us in balancing these issues or concerns. And third of all, I think power is a more universal language, so it would help an interdisciplinary team to make sense of these different normative moral concerns. Because often, it's very abstract terms like fairness and transparency. And I think the language of power comes more natural to us.

[00:17:28] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah, no, this is super helpful. In fact, it is so helpful, I just want to end by thinking about two things towards the future.

[00:17:34] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Yeah.

[00:17:35] EVAN SELINGER:
The first thing is-- and I know maybe there's some differences because as you said, you're speaking to me from Germany. So Europe has a certain way of looking at AI. Maybe it's very different than the United States. Maybe it overlaps in some ways. And I want to think about translating your ideas into action. And I'm wondering what you think policymakers and researchers can do to work with and implement your ideas. And I realize in asking this that the question of what can policymakers do, that might have very different impacts, whether it's in Germany or the US. So answer this however you think is relevant.

[00:18:13] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Yeah. Well yeah. Let me start by saying that I complain a little bit in my work about this principled approach to AI ethics and these kind of guidelines that are used a lot. Because from a philosophical and theoretical perspective, I think it's not working or limited. But I understand that on a practical level, that approach is, of course, easiest to translate into guidelines and legislation. So I do understand why it's so popular. But I have tried, in another chapter of my dissertation, which the articles you are discussing are also part of my or part of my doctoral dissertation, try to develop a kind of a framework with tangible questions, to, first of all, identify power dynamics and then to try to normatively evaluate them. And that's questions like, how might application x and power user y with regards to their self-rule or identity formation or something like that. And I think that this framework could be an alternative to a risk assessment, for example, which is that's the approach that the EU is taking in the AI Act, is a risk assessment for AI. Alternatively, I think we could try to have a framework like that where we ask questions about power and autonomy.

[00:19:36] EVAN SELINGER:
By risk assessment, do you mean dividing AI into tiers of risk from low to high risk.

[00:19:42] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Exactly, yeah. That's what the EU is doing. They categorized four levels of risk. And then for each AI application, first they try to determine in which risk category it falls. And then for every different risk category, there's different guidelines. And for the highest, there's prohibition.

[00:20:06] EVAN SELINGER:
So last thing, because this is for a class, and I think your ideas probably will very much inspire students. They have when I've taught your ideas in person. And one of the things that came up is as students think about the future, they say, well, this is great. We're thinking about power now in a different way. How can we make meaningful contributions to the field? Because a lot of the priorities seem to be dictated by industry and not necessarily people concerned with emancipation. So what advice would you offer? What thoughts do you have on this?

[00:20:42] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Yeah. Great final question. I think for me as well, it can be a little discouraging how much attention AI ethics is getting and how much is already being done in the fields. But I think it's exactly like you said, the industry is dictating this. And that's where we can play a valuable role with a critical perspective, because what the industry is trying to convince us, in a way, is that there's no way back with AI, that it's inevitable, that AI is going to automate our jobs, automate education, that there will be artificial general intelligence, sooner or later. It's not a question of if, but only when. And this perspective, of course, really serves the industry. Because when we take for granted as AI ethicists that AGI is inevitable, we're only going to look for ways to regulate and adapt AI. And that's what's happening, but that's within the boundaries that are set by the industry, like you said. And I think we should be more ambitious than that. So we should really think critically and creatively and radically about alternative ways of developing AI and alternative roles that I could play. And determine or be aware of the fact that the industry is having an influence on the AI ethics debate as well. And I think that's what a critical perspective is perfect for.

[00:22:18] EVAN SELINGER:
This is perfect. Well, thank you so much for talking with me today. Again, I'm so excited--

[00:22:23] ROSALIE WAELEN:
 --for the invitation.

[00:22:24] EVAN SELINGER:
--read and engage with your ideas.

[00:22:26] ROSALIE WAELEN:
Good luck.
