[00:00:01] EVAN SELINGER:
So it's great to talk with you today, Sam Director, and the reason that I invited you here, and I'm so excited that you're able to talk, is that in this ethics of AI course that I'm teaching, the students are going to be reading a really important article that you wrote-- does Black Box AI in medicine compromise informed consent? So I want to help them better understand your ideas, but also get a sense of the person behind them. We're reading a bunch of different things in this course, and you're coming from a particular background. A good deal of your work focuses on medical ethics and bioethics, so students might not have a sense of these fields. So what is, or what are medical ethics and bioethics? And do you feel that your prior work in these fields where you were looking into consent, why did this motivate you to look into this in the AI space?

[00:00:53] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, well, thanks so much for having me. I know some people do use the terms medical ethics and bioethics to pick out distinct fields. I confess I've never really known what the difference is supposed to be. But I broadly view bioethics and medical ethics as just studying applied cases of where it's uncertain what the right thing to do is in situations where doctors and patients come into contact with each other, and then as a related field, public health ethics have just situations where it's uncertain what the right thing to do is where individuals and systems of health come into contact with each other. And I got into this particular topic. Gosh, it's crazy how long these ideas just germinate. I saw a talk when I was in graduate school and maybe year three of graduate school. So that would have been maybe 2018 or '19, where a doctor at the medical school at the University of Colorado, where I was going to graduate school, presented basically this challenge of can you have algorithms that are explainable to people, and what if you can't? And I thought you know, I think this AI stuff is going to be relevant, so maybe I'll incorporate it into my bioethics class. And I just found what I could find on it, and taught that for a couple of years in bioethics. And I thought there's something to say here. So it all began as just seeing someone give a talk on a related topic and thinking that there was something to pull in, like you said, about other work on consent. And yeah, I guess, I see the connection as-- there are lots of challenges to informed consent. Lots of reasons that you might think someone's informed consent shouldn't be the decider between some medical intervention being permissible or impermissible. And AI just presents a new version of an old problem, which is how do we balance what's best for the patient? And giving the patient the explanation that they want. Giving them the information that will help ensure that their consent is informed.

[00:03:07] EVAN SELINGER:
Sure. So let's get into that. And I think it's a good prelude before we even talk about consent. We should talk about some things that you frontload in the article because I think your article does a really great job of beginning by saying, look, there are many benefits that we can see with AI. So before even getting into a problem, you set the stage. And one of these main benefits that you talk about is the potential for accuracy. In fact, your article highlights a number of cases where you've already seen evidence of AI outperforming human doctors. Just really briefly, can you walk us through some of that. You talk about things like predicting hypoxemia and diagnosing diabetic retinopathy and identifying skin malignancies. What is happening in this space where we're seeing better results?

[00:03:54] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah. So my sense is that at least in some areas of medicine, in particular those that involve images that lead to diagnoses, algorithms can already outperform doctors in some cases. So the one that I find most compelling is that researchers at the University of Iowa studied 819 patients and tried to see if they had diabetic retinopathy, which, if I understand correctly, is diabetes can cause vision impairment, basically. And the algorithm they used was 87.2% sensitive, meaning that it was able to correctly identify cases of when people had the condition and 90.7% specific, which means it was able to identify cases where the person did have the condition, sorry, sensitive, meaning does not have the condition. I messed that up. And compared to board certified ophthalmologists, they were sensitive at levels of 33%, 34%, and 73%. So that means that the human doctors in these sample groups were worse than chance in some cases at identifying who didn't have the condition. So at least in this one area, it's not a, oh, the AI might be slightly better than your doctor. At least in this area, the doctor is worse in a coin flip in some cases. And AI is extremely accurate. And that certainly isn't the case in every area of medicine. But I think it would be interesting to think, well, what if it got to that point one day where really we knew that you'd get a better medical outcome. If you went with the AI, could you still give consent to that algorithm in that sense? And does the importance we place on consent, clinically speaking, block you from accessing that better diagnosis?

[00:05:50] EVAN SELINGER:
Sure. So right again. Before we dive into that, there are a couple of other things I think you point out that help set the stage. So in addition to what you just pointed out, you said there's a variety of other benefits we might find by using AI in clinical care. Do you want to point out anything else that you might see as a positive? How could AI reduce costs? Or are there other ways that you could see it improving medical outcomes for patients?

[00:06:15] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, I mean, this is just me speculating on intuitive grounds, but I have to imagine that if you could automate certain parts of the process, if you could automate radiologists, as Geoffrey Hinton suggested at one point, that's a large salary. You're no longer paying. I've heard people say to the contrary, well, in the American Medical system, the salary of the doctors is actually not the thing that drives costs. Fair enough, but at least some costs could be eliminated. And also you could eliminate a certain amount of human error and human slowness at doing tasks. So if you could have AI radiologists and the information is just automatically uploaded and no interpretation by a human is necessary, things could probably just move a lot faster. So I guess in addition to patient outcomes, you could probably reduce costs. And you could probably make stuff just go more efficiently.

[00:07:13] EVAN SELINGER:
So we have these potentially great possibilities. But you also top load the article by talking about some things we need to be on the lookout for before even really diving into this question about explanation. Bias is a perennial issue in AI, and so it's not surprising we might need to be concerned about that in a medical context, which is, broadly speaking, what kinds of risks do you see AI biases potentially presenting to maybe individual patients or maybe even at a systems level, do you imagine it having the potential to affect, say, health care disparities?

[00:07:48] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, there's this general worry about a garbage in, garbage out problem with the data that all these models are trained on. So if you take as an analogous case, people have suggested using algorithms for criminal sentencing. So instead of judges picking how many years you'll serve in prison, an algorithm will do it. And the similar benefits apply. You can illuminate any potential factors of the judge was hungry at the time they did the sentencing, so they were more harsh. AI doesn't get hungry, so it would give consistent results. But the worry is, well, if you train it on a data set where people from racial minorities are disproportionately represented in the prison system, then you're just training it to reify the existing disparities and disadvantages that already exist. So if it's trained on bad data, it's going to give bad outcomes and so forth. And similarly, there are a number of claims that have stuck around in medicine about African-Americans. So, for example, it's not that long ago that medical textbooks would, and I think some still do, say stuff about basically African-Americans experience pain differently from white Americans that lead doctors to take less seriously when African-Americans say that they're in pain. And also this is more of a public health worry. But if you want to use algorithms to solve triage problems, which are just situations where there's a scarcity of resources and we need to make a decision to prioritize one thing over another, it is just true that African-Americans live shorter lives in the US. And the likely explanation of that is the enduring legacy of racism and Jim Crow and slavery. But it is currently true that they live shorter lives. So if you have an algorithm that is told, maximize the number of years of life lived in how you distribute this vaccine or distribute kidneys or something like that. It would be systematically biased against African-Americans because every kidney given to an African-American would translate to fewer years of life achieved than a kidney given to a white American. And this would be a case where it's not like someone told the AI to be racist. It's just it applying the rule you gave it to the existing scenario, but the existing scenario is caused by a historical injustice. So yeah, there are lots of problems with bias, in particular, regarding race.

[00:10:27] EVAN SELINGER:
What about liability because, at least right now, if a doctor makes a mistake, we know who to hold accountable. And there are procedures. There are long standing procedures for addressing that. The more that AI begins to do in a medical context, any just basic thoughts because you flagged this a little bit to. How should we begin to even think about this?

[00:10:48] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, so I and I don't actually know if I am the first to suggest this. Well, I haven't suggested it because I haven't written it, but I have a potential project I want to work on about how to handle, basically, what would AI malpractice look like? Because if the algorithm makes a mistake, it's not a person. You can't blame it. You can't sue it for money. Although I've seen people suggest that as a solution, at least right now, you can't sue it. I don't think you should be able to sue the hospital because they're not in control of OpenAI's medical algorithm. But also if these are deep learning algorithms, neither is OpenAI, really, because they set it loose and it learns on its own. And nor can you blame the doctor themselves because they don't understand the results of or they don't understand the process that an opaque algorithm used to get there. So it seems there's no one to blame. And what I want to defend is that similarly to how we handle liability for vaccine injury in the US, where we have a common pool insurance fund that you can draw from if you have a vaccine injury, but we indemnify or hold free from liability the manufacturers of vaccines, we could do something similar for AI because the thought is, if you tell the manufacturers of AI, you will be responsible for every error these systems make, the odds that someone is going to start producing these systems just massively decreases because the risk is so high. But of course, you don't want to leave it on the other end where people can just get a bad situation or a bad hand dealt to them from a medical AI that malfunctioned, and they have no one to blame and no recourse. So the thought is you could just have a common liability insurance fund, that if someone has documentation that they were given a bad diagnosis or something like that, they could pull into this state-run fund that would pay out to them. And the thought is this solves the problem of, well, there's really no one to blame, but we all know we benefit by having more accurate medical diagnostics. And this would be a way to get both of those things at the same time.

[00:13:04] EVAN SELINGER:
And just two more other just quick prelude kinds of things. Because if we're just thinking broadly about the medical practice and how AI might be changing it, inevitably these two things come up over and over again. There's issues of privacy and there's also issues-- people are very concerned where some people are concerned about once you bring AI or automation into a long standing practice, there's always questions about potential dependencies, about doctors becoming too reliant and potentially maybe losing some skill or having their ability to craft highly competent judgment potentially becoming impaired. Do you see anything in these two spaces that you'd like to jump in on?

[00:13:46] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, so on the point about privacy, I'm less familiar with the issues distinctly related to AI. I guess I would be tempted to say that the privacy issues prompted by AI are probably not different in kind than the ones that already exist in medical systems, where your information is digitized and shared between different hospitals and things like that. So I guess, I mean, that's not a defense of the status quo. I guess that's just to say, well, maybe this would be just as bad as the status quo. Yeah, I guess I'd have to think. I'm not super familiar with that issue. I'd have to think more about it. But to the issue of atrophy of skills, yeah, if I had to speculate on that, I guess I would have to guess that every time there's been an automation and people have had this concern, we could now look back on it and say, oh, isn't it great that doctors or whatever field don't have to waste their time doing that one thing that we've now automated, or this was a point someone made to me at a conference recently where I presented this paper, that there are many more Black Box features of medicine than just AI. So when a doctor sends blood cultures to get a test, they don't know the chemistry behind how such a condition was diagnosed or how the tester, the person who they rate-- was the person who studies blood, not hematologist?

[00:15:24] EVAN SELINGER:
Hematologist. Yeah.

[00:15:25] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah. How they do what they do, I mean, I'm sure if they studied it, they could understand it. But the thought is like I'm not all that worried about an atrophy of doctors ability to understand the results of a blood test, even if they couldn't rehearse to you the chemistry of how blood tests work or something like that. Or similarly, I guess, what, all the email programs now are completing sentences for us. And at least personally, I have not felt that this impairs my ability to write because it honestly is probably just trained on what I usually write. And it knows that I often say, hi, and then fill in the person's first name or something like that. So I guess I'm not that worried about it, but it's possible that may kind of off the cuff speculation is not true, and that it may contribute to doctors becoming atrophied in their diagnostic skills.

[00:16:23] EVAN SELINGER:
Now this is all great, and I appreciate you doing this kind of off the cuff because having that background in medical or bio or no difference between them ethics, it's great that you're able to bring that to bear on thinking about these, I think, fundamental questions with medicine, which enables us now to dive into the thing, the big thing in your article. Let's talk about informed consent in Black Box AI. The big stuff here hangs on a notion of informed consent. Informed consent is so important in medicine, but it's also one of these concepts that people don't understand as well as they often think they do. So just on a very basic level. Before we even get into different models or different ways of looking at it, just broadly speaking, what is informed consent and why is it so central to medical ethics? Because it's not only central to medical ethics, in privacy, for example, consent is a very key idea. So it's one of these applied ethical ideals that we see in a lot of places. But in medical ethics, it's certainly paramount. So what is it? Why is it so important?

[00:17:23] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, so I think of consent as just-- the easiest way to explain it is just it's saying yes to something. So it's authorizing someone to do something, but also it's authorizing someone to do something they couldn't have done without your yes. So one example I would give to students is something like they didn't ask my permission to enter the door of the classroom because they already had that permission. But they would need to ask my permission to borrow my pen because that was not a permission that they had as it was. So consent is the thing that happens when someone asks me something and I say, yes, you can do that. And the kind of consent we care about is not just that you say, yes. You can say yes when you're being held at gunpoint. And we don't think that authorizes the robbery. If the robber said but he said yes, that would not be a good defense. You could say, well, but he was held at gunpoint. So we typically care about consent that is done by a person who is in control of their actions, so it's voluntary, done by a person who is mentally competent, so an adult who is not undergoing some kind of psychotic episode, who can articulate facts around them and can reason about pieces of evidence and things like that, and we also care about that consent being informed. And the reason that in medicine it's called informed consent, you might just think like, oh, why not just say consent. And the informed bit is entailed by that is because for many years in medicine there was consent. Doctors were getting yeses from patients, but it was not a very informed yes. So one of the tragic examples of this is the Tuskegee syphilis trials, where, I forget some of the details, but the crucial bits are that a number of African-American men, I believe, in Alabama, were studied because they had syphilis. And a couple of years into this study, it became known that antibiotics were an effective cure for syphilis, or I think it was penicillin was an effective cure for syphilis. And the people who were involved with this study, who were told they were getting medical care, were essentially not informed that there was a readily available cure that they could access for syphilis. And it went on, I believe, for 30 years, where the researchers just more or less studied what syphilis does untreated to the human body. And you could say, well, those people weren't being forced to go to these areas where they were being studied and that would be right. But they also weren't informed about the relevant details of how to make that decision, and bits of information that would have been crucial to their decision-making process. So one of the reasons consent is so important in medical ethics is because there's such a unfortunately rich history of consent not being taken seriously in medical ethics. And it's not that long ago that people would go in for a surgery related to epilepsy and wake up without a uterus because the doctor thought, well, you have epilepsy, you shouldn't reproduce or something like that. So it's such a focal point for modern medicine because it was a failure of 20th century medicine to not take informed consent seriously. And just more generally, consent is just a really important thing in a lot of areas of life. So the main areas that philosophers talk about consent are in politics. So we supposedly consent to the state's authority over us. And that's what makes the government not a tyranny, that we've given it permission to have authority over us. And then the next area is consent to sexual relations, where we've given people authority or permission to engage with our bodies in ways that they couldn't do if they didn't have that permission. So a very popular phrase people use it comes from a legal scholar named Heidi Heard, is that consent is moral magic. She says it turns an assault into a hug, a home invasion into a dinner party. And she has a couple more examples. But the basic idea is that a lot of things in our lives would be morally wrong if we didn't have permission from others to do them, whether it's borrowing a car, borrowing a pen, having sex, these are all things that require someone's consent for them to be permissible. And medicine just happens to be one of the more important areas where people need our consent in order to interact with us.

[00:21:57] EVAN SELINGER:
And in this medical context, it's especially tricky for reasons that you get to in the article because doctors have a kind of expertise. They understand things at a technical level that we can't expect a patient who's not a doctor to know. So you're pointing out that it's not just consent, it's informed consent. But this begs the question, what standard are we using to figure out whether someone isn't just consenting, but they're giving their consent because they know enough about the situation to truly be informed. And you suggest there's at least a couple of models that are worth thinking about. You talked about a professional practice standard, you talked about a reasonable person standard, and you say there's even something called a subjective standard. Why are there so many standards, and how do they relate to each other?

[00:22:52] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, so this distinction comes from the foundational textbook of bioethics by Tom Beauchamp and Josh. Josh, I think was the first name Childress. And actually, Tom Beauchamp just passed away the other day, but he was one of the founding fathers of bioethics as a modern discipline. And the question is just what do doctors have an obligation to tell patients for their consent to be informed? Or conversely, you could put it as, what do patients have right to know in order for their consent to be informed? So just think about like any transaction we engage in, whether it's buying a meal or buying a car, renting a movie, there's just information you need to know in order for your consent to be valid. And you probably need to know what it's going to cost you. If you go to a restaurant and they say, oh, yeah, we don't have prices, it could be anything. And you say, OK, fine, and the bill is $1 million. You could say, well, I wasn't informed of this. I had a right to know this. So the basic question is, what information do doctors have an obligation to tell you, or conversely, do you have a right to know. And it's puzzling because clearly you don't have a right to know everything. So if someone said, I would like to know the exact millisecond that each part of the surgery will take place, and I would like to know the birth date of all the surgeons who are on the medical team. And just fill in the blank. I'd like to know the fingernail length of the doctors performing the surgery. You might reasonably say, OK, come on, that not the line between if I know this, my consent is informed, and if I don't know this, my consent is not sufficiently informed. So each of these three standards are a way to try to answer that question of how much information do you need to know? I confess that I find that professional practice standard oddly-- I just find it very odd. It's basically just saying, well, it's whatever the professional norm is in medicine, that's how much information the patients are entitled to know. I view that as a non-starter. The two views to me that are plausible are the reasonable person standard and the subjective standard. And the reasonable person standard just says you have a right to know, or you ought to be informed of whatever a reasonable person would want to know while making the decision about consenting to this medical intervention or this surgery. So a reasonable person would probably want to know the risks, the benefits, the recovery time, fill in the blank. A reasonable person probably doesn't want to know the fingernail length of the doctors performing the surgery. And then finally, the subjective standard just says, well, what you have a right to know is just all and only the information that you do want to know. So if I do want to know the fingernail length and I make that known to the doctor, then I have a right to know that. And if the doctor doesn't tell me that, they'd be not sufficiently informing me of what I want to in order for my consent to be valid. And probably, something like a reasonable person standard is correct. There are, of course, worries about, well, how do we spell out what a reasonable person is and what precisely would they want to know. And those will be tricky cases, no matter how you do it. But the thought is, at least roughly, that doctors are obligated to tell you stuff. And they're not obligated to tell you everything because, of course, you couldn't understand everything, because as you said, they know more than you do. But there's at least some stuff that you're entitled to know. And these theories are just trying to tease out what exactly it is that you have a right to know.

[00:26:36] EVAN SELINGER:
Are they at all obligated to ensure that the things that you claim that you know, or just merely tell you the things. And if you say, I know them, take your word for it.

[00:26:45] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
 Yeah, so there's a recent debate about whether doctors are obligated to ensure that you understand, in addition to communicating to you. And people have a variety of views on this. I suspect the law is that you just have to make a reasonable attempt or something like that because I don't think legally you could ensure that someone understands something. And also there are some cases where you might think you can waive your right to understand. If you say, I don't want to know the odds doc, just do what you think is best. You're not understanding the information, but that still seems like something you're allowed to do. And I guess, yeah, maybe we could say a reasonable person would want to be told the information that's relevant in a way they could understand or something like that.

[00:27:36] EVAN SELINGER:
 And this brings us to the Black Box problem, which is the big thing that you're trying to deal with. Most people have probably heard some version of it. But what do you mean by the Black Box problem. And in particular, how is it a kind of potential impediment to informed consent? I mean, on one level, does it impact how a patient can understand the reasoning behind maybe a diagnosis that they get or the possibility of some treatment options being presented and others not like, what's the core, core issue here?

[00:28:09] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
 Yeah, the core issue is that if your doctor is going to some extent be replaced by an algorithm, you can't have access to the information of how the algorithm made its decision in quite the way you can with your doctor. So it would be closer to say, a Magic 8 Ball, who you know is really reliable and you shake it, and you know it's going to give you, good information, but you just-- it's literally in this case a black ball. But it's opaque to you how it made its decision. And it seems, at least intuitively, that for your consent to be informed, you need to have the ability to ask why? Why do you think this doctor? What was the reasoning that led you to this? Even if you don't choose to ask those questions, you at least need to have that ability. But a Black Box algorithm precludes you from that because you just can't ask a question. And the reason you can't ask the question is because it's not because there is no answer. It's because the process of the algorithm is opaque. And I confess that I sometimes don't understand what AI folks mean when they say that. And I've asked-- at my former institution that was part of this AI Research Center, and I asked one of the grad students who worked on AI, what do you mean when you say the outcome is not explainable? Because as a philosopher, I'm thinking, wait, wait, is what they mean that if God had this algorithm, he couldn't tell you why it's making this decision. Or do they just mean you and I, as with limited brains, couldn't tell you why it made the decision? And he couldn't tell me which it was, but I guess it suffice it to say, in the real world, there's just no human mind that could take in all the data points about how this decision is made and explain it to you in English. So maybe the mind of God could understand why these algorithms make the decisions they do, but no human mind could ever do it. So you just can't get an explanation written in English that you could understand for how these, I don't know the exact number, but many, many, many data points are calculated, and how the inferences are made in the way that you could, if you could ask your doctor. And then the worry is, well, is that really informed consent? If you can't access the explanation, is it just the doctor says, do this and you can either say no or yes, but you don't get to ask why.

[00:30:44] EVAN SELINGER:
And so we might hope that there is a simple technical way of resolving this. Hey, let's just make them more explainable, easier for patients to understand. And you basically say, hold the phone, things are not that easy. And you make a distinction between what you call in practice opacity and in principle opacity. So why isn't it so easy that we can just throw this back to the computer scientists and say, look, there seems to be a consent issue. Make the technology easier to understand. Bada boom, we're done. What's the hold up?

[00:31:15] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
 Yeah, so some people suggest explainable AI as the solution or xAI. And then again, this is another area where there are all these distinctions. And you'll find people who say, well, what we mean is intelligible AI. I'm not even that equipped with that terminology. By explainable I just mean it could be expressed to you in English why it made the decision it made. And there are various terms people have used for that. So opaque medical, or excuse me, in practice opaque AI is just opaque to us. It can't be explained to us because of our human limitations. Whereas an in principle opaque algorithm is one that could never be explained to you even by the mind of God. And if what's really going on is that the algorithms we're using are in principle opaque, then there would be no way to explain them. So what we're really talking about is could we take algorithms that are in practice opaque and explain them. And the worry there-- and this is something I'm just deferring to the computer scientists on because I couldn't explain this to you. It's a Black Box to me. And the worry there is that you sacrifice some computing power if you make the algorithms explainable. Whether that's because there is so much information that you couldn't actually explain it to a human, so you have to use less information in order to make it explainable or whatever the explanation is. The claim that computer scientists will sometimes make is that if you prefer explainable AI, it might still be better than the human doctor, but it's not going to be as accurate as the unexplainable AI. And for that reason, this might be a solution in the sense that it could be better for the patient, but it still comes at the cost of giving the patient what could be their best outcome. Because choosing explainability will decrease the accuracy and predictive power of the algorithms that we're using.

[00:33:22] EVAN SELINGER:
OK, so there's a potential tension and a potential trade off. And one way to begin to think of something completely different is you say, hey, let's rethink consent here. And what we need to think about is consent. You introduce an idea called higher order consent. And you're like, this might even be a potential solution to this problem. That wouldn't just be about compromising outcomes in order to have greater explainability in that traditional sense. So what is this higher order consent?

[00:33:52] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
 Yeah, so there's a common distinction in philosophy people make between higher and order levels of information. And first order information is information about the thing. And higher order information is information at a level up from that. So applied to medical information, first order medical information would be the doctor's clinical reasoning process. So you have this white blood cell count, which indicates this is going on in your body, which suggests the following diagnosis. Higher order medical information would be information about my information or about the person giving me the diagnosis. So it would be information like my doctor went to Yale, or my doctor is reliable at diagnosing this condition. They're usually right about it. Or it could be information about the treatment itself. 90% of people who have this surgery have a good outcome or something like that. And what I want to suggest is that the problem for informed consent and Black Box algorithms is only a problem if we assume that consent requires a diagnosis and an explanation in first order medical information. And this, I think, is what many critics of explainable, or excuse me, opaque AI are worried about. They think, look, you have a right to know how the doctor made their decision. Maybe you don't need to access that information if you don't want to. You have a right to also not know it, but you should have the ability to access it. And an opaque algorithm cuts you off from accessing it. But what I want to suggest is that your consent to an opaque algorithm is informed. It's just informed about a different kind of information. It's informed about higher order medical information. So you could, if you're giving consent to a surgery recommended by an opaque algorithm, there's plenty you could know. You could know the statistics about how reliable this particular algorithm is at leading to good outcomes for patients. You could in 90% of the cases it's treated, the patient has lived, or the following outcomes have happened. Or you could higher order information about the treatment itself. You could know that this treatment works at this rate. And none of that requires you to know how the AI made its decision, or any physical explanations of why certain treatments do and don't work. It just requires you to know that it works, basically. So to give you an analogy, this was surprising to me. Apparently, the physical explanation about why Tylenol works is controversial. It does work for a number of things, but it's like the average doctor couldn't explain to you why it works. So the distinction between first and higher order information is, well, if you're prescribed Tylenol by a doctor, first order information would be knowing why it works. And higher order information would be something more like knowing that it works without being able to explain how it works or why it works. And I want to suggest your consent can be sufficiently informed if all you have access to is higher order information, and you could have access to that kind of information about an opaque algorithm.

[00:37:16] EVAN SELINGER:
But beyond that, and this brings us back to our earlier back and forth, I feel like you're also suggesting that, far from being a completely novel way of looking at medicine, maybe a lot of the bump and grind ways that people have been engaging with their doctors might have been at this level anyway. Are you suggesting that that maybe we've been overestimating the types of consent that people have been giving in some cases, and the kinds of information that they have been agreeing to? Are you suggesting that if we basically had a clearer picture of how patients and doctors talk, we might be surprised to learn a good deal of their conversation, which gives rise to consent has really been about this higher order all along, and we've just been assuming or hoping that it's somehow more fine grained than that?

[00:38:06] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, I think that's right. So what I want to suggest is that on the one hand, this sounds really radical. It's a departure from the textbook view of informed consent. But on the other hand, it actually fits commonsensically with what we do all the time, where people have the ability to say, I don't know why it works, but I know that it does work. And it seems like a lot of medicine is this way. Medicine is typically not a complete science where you know the physical explanations of why things work down to the molecular level. A lot of it is a practical science, where we just know, well, typically this has worked when this has been the case. So why don't we give that a shot. And if it turns out that a lot of medicine does operate that way, then it seems to already be operating in terms of higher order consent as is. And just to give one example, so I'm quoting here from a piece by I. Glenn Cohen where he says, OK, basically, yeah, this is true of most referring to AI. This is true of most FDA approved pharmaceuticals. The physician is likely quite ignorant of the underlying trial design, or results that led to the FDA to believe the drug was safe and effective, but her knowledge that it has been FDA-approved supplies the necessary epistemic warrant. So the thought is, a lot of medicine does work like a Magic 8 Ball, but it's just a really reliable Magic 8 Ball used by someone who knows about this, various rates of how reliable the Magic 8 Ball is at telling you different kinds of questions.

[00:39:52] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's think about this in practice, then. I mean, if a patient were to say, OK, I recognize that I'm dealing with some kind of a Black Box, the best I'm going to get is this higher order consent. And I'm going to give you permission, medical institution for it to work this way. Do you have any thoughts on what kinds of evidence we would at least-- what kind of a standard or what kinds of evidence would we want to know at least we're not being too glossy or so removed from what a patient needs to know that this concept of higher order just becomes elastic enough to mean, well, you know what I'm talking about. Or how do we prevent it from becoming too far off the mark?

[00:40:38] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, I've been thinking about this recently because a lot of what I'm saying assumes that we would have readily available this clean information about, well, the algorithm was this effective before at treating people. And we can know its success rate. But of course, you can't know its success rate until it's actually been used on people. But if in order to give your consent to it, you need to the success rate. We've got a bit of a circularity problem there. So what I want to suggest is that we might need to engage in some risky research about seeing what happens when we treat people using AI. So of course, this would be with people's consent. But you could run studies where you have a group of patients treated by a human doctors and a group of patients treated by a medical AI. And of course, you could have a human doctor observing to prevent catastrophic error and things like that. But the thought would be like, let's run some experiments on this. And that seems maybe callous. I don't know if a research approval committee would approve that. Maybe not. But I do think that's the kind of information we'd need to know. But I honestly don't know why you couldn't treat it like any other novel pharmaceutical where people do run randomized controlled trials on their efficacy, knowing that there are risks. So to me, it seems similar to that.

[00:42:03] EVAN SELINGER:
Do you want a patient in that situation to want to sign up for such a thing because presumably unlike a clinical trial where you're saying, hey, existing things that we could give you are probably not going to produce the results that you want. So this might be a bit of a long shot, but it's a long shot that can give you something that the off the shelf things aren't likely to.

[00:42:27] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah.

[00:42:28] EVAN SELINGER:
Where you're trying to figure out what it can offer. How are you able to provide a sufficient reason or a compelling reason? Why would a patient want to sign up for that kind of a experiment?

[00:42:39] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
 Yeah, so this is where it may get controversial. So I'm sympathetic to just payment for enrollment in those cases where we all stand to benefit a lot from really reliable medical AI. You're right that patients, if there's already a workable system, which is human doctors that we've been using for a long time, why would patients, especially those with potentially terminal illnesses, undergo a experimental treatment that is totally unknown. And yeah, I think it's in all of our interests if the state just stayed or pharmaceutical companies or whoever gave out massive amounts of money to incentivize people to engage in this kind of treatment. And I guess I view that as a win-win because no one would consent to it if they didn't think it was worth it for them. And then we all hopefully get something beneficial on the back end.

[00:43:36] EVAN SELINGER:
OK, I hadn't thought of asking this, but now that you've mentioned that one possible objection, which obviously you're well aware of, and I'd just love, I'd love for the students to hear your response. Sometimes people talk about informed consent. Sometimes they talk about free and informed consent. Just throwing in an incentive, a financial incentive run any kind of risk about whether the freeness of the informed consent somehow becomes a bit compromised, or is that something that's completely resolvable in the scenario that you're imagining?

[00:44:08] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, there are definitely-- folks in research ethics are really worried about this. And they sometimes call it undue inducement. And the basic idea is we need to pay people to enroll in research. Otherwise, we wouldn't have any research subjects. But there are some cases where you can pay people too much money, and especially if it's a risky trial, the thought is it's like a godfather. Well, students in my classes don't get the godfather reference, but it's an offer so good. You can't refuse. It is the thought. So in a manner of speaking, it's like if I offered you $1 million right now, and you are down on your luck, I could ask you to do anything, and you would do it. I could say, I'm going to give you this drug that will probably kill you, but here's a million bucks. And the thought is, well, you're helpless in the face of that million dollars. And the thought is you've been unduly induced into joining the trial. I am skeptical of that idea. I think that we don't undermine people's autonomy when we give them more benefits. They had the option to not be involved in the trial and go with the human doctor, and all we've done is just give them something that they can decide if it's in their interest or not. And we could even add constraints for like and this should not be applied to people who are in desperate need. And they're only choosing this because they don't have access to regular medical care or something like that. You could put in parameters to minimize even those risks. So in research ethics, it's not the popular view. But my view is that payment is not a threat to your ability to choose autonomously.

[00:45:52] EVAN SELINGER:
Sure. And so you've got a straightforward response to that objection. And with objections, this is something that students who haven't read philosophy before find interesting at first. Good philosophers often include objections in their papers because you can make your arguments stronger by showing awareness that you're not just saying, and here's my case. Believe it. You've thought of smart people who aren't persuaded, and you're able to articulate why they're wrong. You raise two objections there. You've talked about the Magic 8 Ball as we've gone back and forth, but you actually formalize it. What is the Magic 8 Ball objection? And why do you think, hey, it's a wrong way of looking at this?

[00:46:33] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
 Yeah, the objection is something like if it turns out that medicine would function like you shake the Magic 8 Ball, and it just gives you a random answer. We wouldn't want that. And you would never consent to that. And my response is to say, but what if it's a really reliable Magic 8 Ball. It's truly a magic. Magic 8 Ball, it can give you answers that are as good as or better than the expert who would normally interpret it, or something like that. And my suggestion there is just that's a Magic 8 Ball I'd sign up for. If it really were in my interest to be treated with it, and it was more accurate, we should all sign up for that Magic 8 Ball treatment.

[00:47:15] EVAN SELINGER:
And is the basis, the fundamental basis of that way of looking at things because the most important thing in this context is getting the best outcome.

[00:47:26] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yes, so I don't want to assume that-- so I recently learned the term healthism as the idea that health is the only thing that's valuable. And I think it's fair to say a lot of doctors are healthists, people who think that your medical interests are your only interests, and anything else besides that shouldn't factor into your decision. And of course, that's not true. People have interests that are beyond medical interests. People have interests in religious integrity. They have interests in financial security. And all of these things can be added into the mix about what the right medical choice is. So if one is totally focused on health, then, yes, you should prefer the best outcome. I'm not assuming that's how most people are because I don't think most people are that way. I guess what I'm assuming is that absent some compelling other interests like a religious integrity interest, or a financial interest, the reasonable person is interested in promoting their health to the best of their ability. I suppose, of course, if someone were ideologically against health, and they said no, I actually, in fact, don't want to be a healthy person, then it wouldn't be in their interest to be treated by the Magic 8 Ball, in this case.

[00:48:46] EVAN SELINGER:
And then you give a colorful variation of this objection. You call it the pigeon radiologist objection. What's that, and why is that wrong?

[00:48:55] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
 Yeah, this was fun. I read this paper by this gentleman named Ramon Alvarado in which he addresses basically the same problem I'm addressing of, this trade-off between explainability and reliability or accuracy. And there's this expression that one person's modus ponens, there's another person's modus tollens, just like one person's absurd conclusion is another person's, oh, that seems so right to me conclusion. And he goes into all this really astounding evidence that you can train pigeons to be very reliable radiologists, which is wild on the one hand, and also why pigeons? I'm into birds and they're the least interesting bird in some ways. Why couldn't it have been herons or something like that? But it's pigeons. So apparently pigeons can be-- via various methods, I'm not familiar with all the details, they can be trained to be reliable at radiology. And Alvarado looks at that and says, well, isn't that the reason why we shouldn't trust AI? Because it would be the same reasoning would justify pigeon radiologists. And we don't want pigeon radiologists. And my thought is just the opposite. It's like, wait, if the pigeon radiologists were actually better for us, and they were cheap and they're cool, to be honest, bring on the pigeon radiologists, is my thought.

[00:50:22] EVAN SELINGER:
I think that should be the T-shirt students should be wearing while they're reading this. Bring up the theologist. And so just to end looking a little bit forward. So now that you've gotten a little bit of a taste of bridging some of these gaps between biomedical ethics and AI, you've been weighing in on the space. We've been talking about this paper. Do you have anything else in the pipeline? Are there future things in this space that you also want to start working on?

[00:50:48] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
I am interested in-- we talked about this briefly earlier about how to talk about liability in AI and who we blame when AI miscalibrates as far as general things in technology ethics I'm trying to think. I mean, I like all of us, I'm a captive spectator to how AI is playing out in the classroom, and I'm interested in that. And ways that we could or could not have reliable detectors for AI plagiarism, and whether those are fair or unfair. And what the responsibilities of companies like OpenAI are in those spaces. And I'm also interested, I think, I mentioned this before in how AI can be used in the distribution of scarce medical resources. And there are a lot of cool ideas. If you would ask an AI, hey, I have limited time. I can't do all the math right now, but I want to give the kidney to the person who's going to live the longest. Help me figure that out. But also, there are a lot of worries with treating those distribution problems through AI.

[00:52:00] EVAN SELINGER:
Awesome. Well, thanks again. I really appreciate this. And I can't wait for the students to be able to read the article.

[00:52:05] SAMUEL DIRECTOR:
Yeah, thanks so much for having me.
