[00:00:02] EVAN SELINGER:
Hey. It is great to talk with you today, Dr. Thomas Carroll. And the reason we're having this conversation is I'm teaching an online ethics of AI course. And the students are going to be reading a whole bunch of things, including an article that you and I both wrote together called "The ethics of empathetic AI in medicine." And so I want to help them understand the ideas that we're presenting. And today, we'll explore some of those main themes. But obviously, there are people behind ideas. And so before we dive into what you and I wrote, I want them to get a sense of who you are, because you're a double threat. You're both a practicing physician, and you're focusing on internal medicine and palliative care, but you're also an associate professor of medicine at the University of Rochester. So you have a combination of clinical practice and teaching and research. How does all of this inform the way that you're looking at healthcare and AI.

[00:00:58] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah. Thank you. Thanks for having me. This is-- it's fun to talk about. It's fun to write about. And yeah, AI, I think as everybody knows, for whatever AI means for an individual, is here to stay, in a way. It's already happening, whether we know it or like it or not. When it comes to medicine, gosh, I think we'll get into this a little bit, but there are just so many different ways that it's infiltrating-- it already has, in fact, infiltrated the practice of medicine that we're all worried about these big things and those are important. And we'll talk about some of that, I'm sure. But it's already there. And so we're really thinking about how do we make this thing work for us, in a way, I hope, be aware of it when it's there, and try to find ways, people keep-- the promise seems to be it's going to offload those things that I don't need to do. And it seems like so far it's trying to do the things I do do. Do you know what I mean? Sorry. So yeah, it's a little weird in the moment. But we're in that phase of figuring it out. So yeah.

[00:01:57] EVAN SELINGER:
So our article focuses on something specific. We're not talking about how to use AI to cure cancer. We're not talking about how to use AI to do, I don't know, to read images. We're talking about AI and empathy. And we focus on that because of some specific issues that are happening, basically, to medicine writ large, certainly affecting doctors. So just to tee things up, at least in the US, where both of us are, why is it that medical professionals and doctors are among them? They're experiencing some pretty hard things, burnout and moral injury. And how do you see these things as influencing their ability to be empathetic or to communicate empathy to patients?

[00:02:40] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah. No, I mean, there's a lot of things that have all contributed to this. And the stock excuse for everything these days is COVID, but it's real. I mean, there was a lot of stress there. And what came out of that time, now that we're I guess beyond the emergency of it anyway, is we have a lot less staff. We have many fewer people out there, generally, whether the fast food joint or it's the hospital. We're really short staffed. And that puts a lot of stress on the system. And so yeah, we just don't have enough people to start with. The second thing is that people and, rightly, I think, patients are much more empowered these days in the sense that information is just available. It's not just in the book that's on my bookshelf anymore in the office. But rather people come in with this-- sometimes they come in less with symptoms and more with diagnoses. They say, hi, I have bronchitis as opposed to hi, I'm short of breath. I mean, there's a big difference there in terms of how we interact with humans. And that's hard, in a way. And so yeah, that burnout thing is-- it's multifactorial, of course. But at least, one thing is just the busyness, just feeling like I can never get off the hamster wheel, and it just goes forever. And then that moral injury thing, I think, comes in when we feel like we should be accomplishing this goal over here, that's important, and I can't. I don't have the power, for whatever reason, to get there. And that's incredibly frustrating. And I think it's that either you can have one big moment of moral injury or it's just this slow, insidious thing underneath the surface, which I think is more common. And yeah, there's just a lot of it going on these days, and it's driving people out of medicine. Honestly, it's making people quit. And then, oh, man, we ended up in this self-reinforcing cycle. As people leave, there are fewer staff, and you end up with more stress. And the whole thing goes on.

[00:04:24] EVAN SELINGER:
But so how does that implicate or affect in the day to day a physician, when they want to sound empathetic or they want to feel empathetic? What's happening? What's the consequence?

[00:04:37] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah, so I think we started a place where many times in the medical world we have trouble expressing empathy, and it's partly that we-- I think it just becomes so hyper technological in many ways. There's just so many details. And my comfort zone, if you will, as a physician, is the details. I'm really good about the pathophysiology. I'm really good about-- if I'm an oncologist, I'm really good about the chemo or surgeon. I'm really good about surgery. And so we tend to-- that's where we live and that's what we do. And so we think about-- and it's easy to forget or miss in the moment. But this is a human being. We're talking to. This has been an age old problem in some ways, but I think it's exacerbated now by this really high-pressure to high-paced environment. And then as I get more stressed, I don't do as well. If I'm not feeling good, I tend to not do well. And then I tend to not feel like I have the emotional energy to express sympathy. And, oh, man, if I acknowledge these tears that are almost in somebody's eyes, I'm going to be here all day. And I don't have all day is my concern-- is the concern. So I think it's, again, becomes part of this cycle where we feel more stressed, we express less empathy that stresses our patients out, which stresses us out. And then we continue on this cycle. So it's a challenge in that way, yeah.

[00:05:46] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's just talk for a minute about clinical benefits with empathy, because there's a misunderstanding, I think, a lot of people have. I think if you were to ask a lot of people, what would you like? They would say, great clinical care and an empathetic Doctor but if I can't get both, I'd rather get great clinical care. That empathy is a nice thing, and I want to feel seen and heard. But the important thing, if I can only get one, is good medical care. And yet, the relationship between empathy, when doctors and patients have it, isn't just about feeling good. It does have some very specific clinical benefits. What are they?

[00:06:23] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah. So there's been a lot of study about this. And the things that are true is when a patient feels understood, and is a-- part of that is this expression of empathy from the clinician side, patients tend to have a number of good things happen. One of them is that they tend to understand their prognosis better. So if I'm having a conversation about how much time somebody, let's say, may have to live or what the likelihood is of their cancer being cured, whatever, they tend to get closer to what I'm trying to say, if I'm expressing empathy, which is interesting. And yeah, so things like that. There are some actual-- there are a number of studies out there in that way. And yeah, we also know people that are feeling better in some way, and feeling more supported, feeling, let's say, less depressed or anxious, which I think we can help people get there by being empathetic, they tend to have less pain, or the pain they have, they suffer less from. If I feel depressed, I tend to feel the pain more intensely than I'm having. Pain is still there when I don't feel, let's say, depressed or stressed. But I just suffer less from it. And so there are lots and lots of these examples out there about, if you will, the utilitarian side of empathy. And then just to say, too, I mean, we should-- there's-- what role does it have? I mean, I think it has a role in the humanness of the human interaction, that if we should, of course, optimize those outputs, those good things, because we should and because we just-- we simply should. They're humans. And I think It helps them, yeah, be seen as humans and helps me see them as humans in my of formation, if you will. And I think both those things are really important to keep in our view.

[00:08:02] EVAN SELINGER:
 And so clinically, too, I suppose, if you feel that you have an empathetic relation, will that help with things like-- doctors can only do their job if they have all the information they need. So maybe a patient who feels more empathetic, they might feel more comfortable disclosing some relevant facts that might be a bit embarrassing or make them feel vulnerable. Or maybe they're more willing to actually do what their doctors recommend because they feel a bit more connected, are these other benefits that would go with empathy?

[00:08:31] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah. So when quote, "good communication," and I think empathy is part of that in these-- the various studies that have been done. When there's good communication, yeah, there is better adherence to the plan. [AUDIO OUT] probably part of it is that people are more accepting of the plan. And part of it is if I'm being empathetic, I'm probably also just a better communicator. And maybe I'm coming to a plan that is actually not exactly what I thought I wanted as the doctor. It isn't exactly what-- but something in between, and so we're closer to maybe what the patient thought was reasonable to. And so then they're more likely to do this thing, because we came to a plan that actually works for them, as opposed to me just coming from on high and trying to say, this is the thing to do.

[00:09:06] EVAN SELINGER:
So, given the importance of good communication and given the importance of empathy and good doctor patient communication, before we had AI, how were doctors learning it? What were the ways in which this was taught? And what are the strengths and weaknesses of these more traditional approaches?

[00:09:23] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah, so I would say many doctors currently practicing went to medical school at a time when this really wasn't taught at all, essentially, at least not in any explicit formal way. There's this concept of the hidden curriculum, the things that aren't said, but we do anyway or-- part of that is, it's not nefarious. But it's just sort of it's just what it is. Yeah, it's this-- The traditional medical training is one of an apprenticeship. So I'm just learning all the milieu of what's happening. And so I tend to act like the people who are teaching me in a way. So if that person is really empathetic, great. When we do explicitly teach it, I would say probably most of the time it's early on in medical school, first, second, maybe third year, some of the fourth year, rarely in residency, but when we teach it, it's often with a standardized patient. So we have an actor or someone who's been trained in this way come in and play the part of a patient. And oftentimes, if I'm the medical student, we're being recorded. And so we can go back and dissect the conversation. And sometimes it's just about, did I do the shoulder exam right? Other times it's about, well, gosh, did I have this conversation in a way that was good. And one of those things is empathy. So yeah, that's often how it's done. And as you might imagine, that's very time intensive. It's expensive. You have to pay this human being to be there. And so it's a thing that can be done sometimes, and should be, but is not available outside of that role for the most part.

[00:10:47] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's now bring this up to the world of AI, because you just spoke about how doctors would-- you called it the hidden curriculum. But people model themselves off other people who seem to be doing a good job. There are role playing activities that you just described. Somebody, an actor, pretends to be or simulates being a patient. And now you're trying something new. And you're trying something new with a project that's called the SOPHIE project. And this is happening at the University of Rochester. What is this? How are you using AI? And how are things-- what have you done so far? And how is this project evolving?

[00:11:20] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah, it's been fascinating. I got brought into this because I run a communication training program, like I was describing, with actors and that sort of thing for about, I don't know, eight years now or so. We started it that long ago. And so through that I got connected with this computer science group, on the main part of the U of R campus. And yeah, they have this avatar, this picture on the screen that moves and talks. And the 1.0, which is this-- was very choppy. It was like, obviously not a person. It was weird. You get strange answers. So the algorithm in the background, they have now upgraded that to ChatGPT in the background for real. That's really ChatGPT. And that's now the thing generating the speaking that's happening.

[00:12:04] EVAN SELINGER:
What is the avatar coming across as?

[00:12:06] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah, so the first one is like, late middle-aged White woman, basically, is what it comes down to. Actually, the current version has almost too many options. I don't know. There's this big grid. And you can choose all the different demographic visual features, anyway. And so yeah, I think probably what we'll end up doing is giving some limited choice. So there's some reasonable choice, but people aren't overwhelmed with this choice. But yeah, in terms of how the avatar looks, as you might imagine, there are really no limits. You can make it look like whatever you want. That's very programmable. The rest of it is a different story. How it actually acts is a different thing. But yeah, that's where it's at. And it's actually pretty conversational now, to tell you the truth. I mean, you can have a conversation with it. It's obvious that it's not a human, I think. But, man, it's pretty good in terms of the back and forth.

[00:12:58] EVAN SELINGER:
So just to add just a little bit more detail with that. So whether it was the original version or this new customized LLM-fueled version, doctors are talking with an avatar, and the avatar is representing a patient and presenting a patient's point of view. What else is going on? Because it doesn't part of it have an ability to provide some feedback to doctors as they're talking? What kind of feedback are they getting?

[00:13:23] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah, this is really amazing to me. They can do this too. And so they've done a lot of work, the computer science folks, to take the transcript. So you get this automated transcript, and it knows who's talking. And they are able to take these, as they say, utterances. The thing that I say is the user, and categorize it as one of a few different skills. And so we talk about three main skills. There's this empowering thing, making sure we're on the same page, being explicit, make sure I'm saying the words that need to be said, like you have something terrible. And then there's the empathy thing. So the empathy is one of these three skills. And they're able to, pretty reliably, as best we can tell, categorize those things and say, how you doing. So they can tell you, well, you did this many, maybe it's enough, maybe it's not enough. And that feedback is generated automatically and is very personalized in the moment. And yeah, it's pretty amazing.

[00:14:16] EVAN SELINGER:
So you're very clear, and your team is very clear. This is meant to complement not replace other forms of communication training. So within that purview what are the advantages that adding this to what we previously had? What do physicians get if they--

[00:14:32] THOMAS CARROLL:
 Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. So the basic thing is that it's scalable, essentially. It's scalable, and it's reproducible. It's programmable. When we have an actor, of course, the actor is there, the actor has a certain range of emotions that human is capable of doing, depending on how, I guess, good an actor they are. They look a particular way, they are-- whatever race they are, whatever all those things. And so the SOPHIE thing, this avatar, is programmable in all those ways. It's scalable. All you need is more server space for what it's worth. And you can do this really anywhere, anytime, that has internet connection. So that's the mechanics of it. I think the benefit here is if we can integrate this or if we do integrate this into something like a communication training course, standardized patient sort of thing-- Right now we're teaching the basics, almost, of communication with this really high-cost environment, with these standardized patients. We're doing the basics. If we could do something like SOPHIE, let's say, beforehand and get some of the basics under somebody's belt, we could then take it to the next level, essentially, and really use that time, most effectively, with the standardized patient, and then offer it afterwards as well, so that these training things don't become a one-off and then you go back to your life and do what you've always done, but rather consolidate that learning over time.

[00:15:53] EVAN SELINGER:
So this sounds incredibly innovative. And as with all innovative things, there's always challenges. So obviously, if a human actor is pretending to be a patient, they can draw on things like, they've been sick themselves, and they've had experience with other people. To be a human being, at some point, you're going to be sick. So what are the main challenges or obstacles you've encountered, either in putting this thing together or even just convincing doctors, who haven't done anything like this before, to give it a whirl.

[00:16:21] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah. So putting it together, I'm truly not the person putting it together, but I can tell you one of the challenges right now actually used to be this algorithm was very restrictive. Now we've got ChatGPT in the background, which is actually restrictive in its own way. It won't do crazy things. It won't yell at you. It won't say racist things to you. And sometimes, patients say crazy things to me. Sometimes they're express some racism. So if we want to model something like that, you just-- like ChatGPT, you can tell it to do it. But it'll just go back to its original safe programming, which I think is still a good thing. I don't want ChatGPT doing crazy things out in the world. So the next step is-- the computer science folks are actually-- they're creating their own large language model that will be much more-- yeah, it'll be there so they can make it do whatever they want. So that'll become more customizable. But then to your point about a human actor brings their own humanness to this, and if you say oh, you were acting-- one of the things that's come up is you're acting like a stereotype. They might be, actually, that's who I am. Whereas if we program this LLM to portray whoever, we might end up insulting a whole swath of people by accident. And so yeah, so this is something that's come up. But I think everybody's still struggling with what to do with this and what do you-- how do you address that? Yeah.

[00:17:39] EVAN SELINGER:
So because it's an ethics of AI course, in just a second. I want to ask a couple of basic ethics questions. But before that, I'm curious, I'm sure the students watching this are curious. So now that you've participated in this a bit, so now you have clinical experience, you have research experience, again, a double threat who's been now working on a very specific thing in AI in medicine, has this given you any way of looking at AI in medicine that maybe you didn't have a perspective on this before? Or has it sharpened something? Are you looking at issues any differently with this particular thing under your belt now?

[00:18:16] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah, I think AI has gotten good enough that it fools us in a way. It appear that it's doing what I'm doing in the sense of thinking or reasoning. And I think as I've seen this thing develop over time, and I've pushed the limits of what this particular model can do at the moment, it becomes clear to me what the limitations really are, and that there are really severe limitations in many ways. If you read the internet news or whatever, I have this feeling, you get-- at least, I get this feeling when I read the news, that I can just do anything. It's just a matter of a couple more tweaks. And it may be true that it can do a lot more than it can do currently or will be in the future, but, man, I think there are still going to be real limitations. Yeah, I think to answer your question about how has it sharpened for me, it's really made me realize it's not doing what I thought it was doing or I assumed it was doing, in a way. It's doing something completely different in this space than what I think my mind is doing. And yeah, that's helped me in thinking about other AI applications that I'm like, it's going to do-- it could do something weird here. It could do something, can totally go off the rails, because it's actually not-- the mechanism underneath the hood, if you will, is not what it appears to be. So that's helped me, I think, put that in perspective a little bit, if that makes sense.

[00:19:29] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah. So I mean, it sounds like there may be some over promise, maybe some idealism or a little bit of hype in the news. And having grounded everyday experience, you're getting a much more pragmatic, realistic sense of where we're at. This is what I'm hearing you say?

[00:19:45] THOMAS CARROLL:
I hope so. I think so. I hope so. I hope it's true. [LAUGHS]

[00:19:48] EVAN SELINGER:
So yeah, I'm sure it is. And let's now talk about the ethics, because we don't need to do a deep dive. But there are a couple of big issues we should at least touch on. And they've already come up, at least implicated, in what you've said. So you mentioned the first SOPHIE was one particular type of an avatar. And now, the new SOPHIE not only is powered by an LLM, but you're saying that it's customizable. There are different avatars that you could choose. I would imagine the shift from one to the other has reflected some thought. This is a conscious decision. What does this tell us about the ethics of designing an avatar? What are your thoughts on this?

[00:20:28] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah, there are a lot. There's, yeah, somehow trying to be real and authentic with this thing, recognizing the limits of that, and, yeah, just trying to, I guess, ultimately at the end of the day, not reinforce those negative stereotypes that already exist in these LLMs because they've been essentially trained on the world's worth of misery and all this stuff online. It's not all pretty. And a lot of these things have-- there's been a lot of suggestion out in the world, I think, that they're potentially going to-- have the risk of reinforcing stereotypes. And so to try to not do that with what we're doing, while at the same time, allowing users, people are going to do this, to explore the space of different interactions with people either who look like me or don't look like me, have a similar background, don't have a similar background. I think that's a big challenge and something we need to keep thinking about and talking about so that we don't accidentally drift towards, I don't know, the bad end of that spectrum, I guess.

[00:21:26] EVAN SELINGER:
So even though the new version is powered by an LLM, at least, my understanding is this isn't completely generated by an AI that you've actually entered-- the team has integrated some information that has come from interviews with patients, because you're trying to keep this as real as possible. This isn't just left to what an I can simulate. The AI is dealing with actual data and information from patients. So when you're trying to create a real faithful-- as best as you can, something that feels like a patient, feels different kinds of patients, how do you deal with some of the biggies? And these are issues that go back to regular medical ethics, and it's no surprise they would appear in AI ethics. People are going to say, oh, well, consent matters and privacy matters. How do you think about issues like that?

[00:22:15] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah. So I mean, certainly thinking about consent and privacy for the user, because they're always recorded, we're all being recorded all the time, it seems, and really trying to balance, I guess, any app or whatever, trying to balance that we're going to collect some information to hopefully iteratively improve this thing, but doing so in a transparent and clear way so that people know what they're getting into, how their data are being used-- And at the same time being transparent, and not saying, hey, we're collecting everything about you, to the extent that we push that level up of the invasiveness of this, I think, it'll make it less used, because more people will say, no, thanks, if they feel like we're taking their Social Security number or something. So you have to try to balance those things. There is some need to iteratively improve this thing. And at the same time, we want to make it safe for humans so we're not accidentally exposing their information or somehow unethically using it, while also making sure that, yeah, we just keep it usable for folks so it doesn't feel too invasive.

[00:23:18] EVAN SELINGER:
So that's on the user side. What about on the patient side, insofar as some of the information comes from the patient and you guys are taking safeguards? How do you think about things like consent and privacy with respect to building the model?

[00:23:30] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah. So what we've done so far-- to the extent that we've used and they have used some actual transcripts from previously published studies. So these studies that they've used went through the ethics-- the review process in terms of institutional review board, like an IRB setup. Admittedly, though, this wasn't part of it. They didn't sign the thing that said, my information will be used to train an AI, because this was some years ago. This was before all of this stuff even came to be. I hope it's obvious, but obviously, it's all de-identified. There's no way to track back this particular conversation that was one of those that was used to train this thing back to a human. At least I'm not aware of there being any way to do that, because it really has been anonymized even before we got-- before we had access to any of these things. So I think that's important thing to go forward. Probably, as you'll talk about in other places, but it's one of the sticking points out there in the world about AIs generally is that they're reading copyrighted material, and using it inappropriately for their own gain. So we don't want to go that direction either, of course.

[00:24:39] EVAN SELINGER:
So one of the advantages that you mentioned of using this to complement traditional medical communication education is it can provide consistency at scale, at a low cost, and the newer versions have more options to choose from so you get more diversity. Is AI at a point where you can envision, or in the future, that avatars can be customized to present enough diversity, whatever that means. Because there are so many kinds of patients demographically, individuals have their own differences, how do you think about all these possibilities with respect to, at the end of the day, you've got to make some choices about what options a doctor can interact with?

[00:25:21] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah. It's interesting. I think there are two extremes, I think, to avoid. And probably, there's a happy medium somewhere. One extreme is to make it always the late middle-aged White woman. And that's probably not the answer, because there's more diversity out there than that, of course. But I will say, even that just in and of itself, when we've done these relatively small pilot studies, we see improvement, even with SOPHIE 1.0 that had no LLM underneath it, people still did better. I don't think it's true that we have to make this pass the Turing test. We don't have to make this like, oh, I thought I was talking to a human in order to make this good. What we need is-- I keep likening it to sports. I'm not a tennis player. I'm terrible. But Roger Federer, I think he's retired now. But he would go out there with a ball machine and just hit forehands, and then ball machine just hit backhands. This is nothing like playing a real person. But he's going through the motions. And that's important to do, to practice those motions. And I think there's true value just in doing that. So just to keep that in the back of our minds as we think about the customizability of it. We don't want to over customize it either, because I think we run the risk of this-- we had this conversation one time about, gosh, could we integrate this into an electronic medical record, where I say, oh, I know I have a hard situation coming up with my next patient in about 10 minutes. And I click on a thing in my EMR, in the chart, and it brings up something that looks so much like my patient, I almost can't tell the difference, and I practice this thing. I worry about over modeling. By saying, I've convinced myself that this model is so good that when I get into the real world, I'm going to love it, potentially, because this person's not going to act exactly like the super customized thing that I just did. That sounds crazy, but I think it's possible that we could go too far in that direction. And the customizability could become an end in itself as opposed to the means to an end, if you know what I mean. So I think it's important to say, what are we really going for. Are we going for, I need to recognize sadness and then say, I'm sorry you feel this way? If that's the case, how much does it matter? Maybe you want some choices. On the other hand, if I'm like, gosh-- if it's Haitian refugees that I'm working with, maybe there are some real cultural things that are important there. And maybe we could work that into an avatar like this. But is that necessary for the purposes of learning how to be empathetic? I think not necessarily, because there's that core of humanity. Everybody has emotions. So I think we can train that in a relatively generic way without going too crazy, but make it customizable enough that it's comfortable for people. And then in those specific use cases, as they say, if we have some particular thing we're going for, then maybe hyper customize it for that. But be really clear that's what we're doing, I think is important.

[00:28:03] EVAN SELINGER:
Related, and this comes up with every issue in AI when we're talking about how to measure whether something works as intended and what utility we're getting out of it. You just spoke to really important things to think about with respect to what we're aiming for, what the goal of this is, what we're hoping. So because they provide feedback, that you mentioned before, how do know if the feedback is good? What's the quality assurance that you could provide? Does this have to involve certain kinds of special considerations? Or how do you think about that?

[00:28:36] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah, it's a great question. I was listening to a podcast about this, health AI in the health space, where they were doing these-- what a nurse would normally do. Human nurse would call patients. And they had this AI thing calling patients. And what they did was they started to employ nurses to check on the AI. For the first month, they checked on all of them. And then after that, OK, we trust it a little bit. So now they start sampling it and monitoring some, but not all. I suspect it's going to be something like that. I think we're still going to have to have probably, I hope, some human in the loop to make sure that this is not like, oh, it was good six months ago. But now it's drifting and going off the rails and telling people to do things that are not good. That would be awful. The only other suggestion has been, well, let's build an AI to monitor the AI. And I say, you mean ad infinitum. Do you mean just like-- is it turtles all the way down kind of thing? Or is there a base? And I the base has to be humans, because at the end of the day, I am just not convinced. I am not one of these futurist technology people that I think we can just do everything with computers. I think there's something about humans that is different, that is special in a way. And I worry about having too many layers of AI monitoring AI. And if there's a problem with the first one, I don't see how there can't be a problem with the second one and the third, and so on. So ultimately, I think needs to be some human quality control in this to make sure that we're not going off the rails. How do you know that person's judging it correctly? Another issue. But I think there needs to be something like that.

[00:30:06] EVAN SELINGER:
Sure. Now brace yourself because I've got the two hard hitting ethics questions--

[00:30:10] THOMAS CARROLL:
[LAUGHS]

[00:30:11] EVAN SELINGER:
 --here's the first one. And this is something that comes up in so many domains of AI. You've outlined a very compelling use case, very compelling. Someone might be worried. This works very well in a well-resourced or a decently-resourced environment, where you can use this as a great compliment. But maybe there's a risk that the better systems like this get, the less resources, in some places, will be spent on the face to face and traditional things. So the concern is that maybe well-intentioned, it opens up Pandoras Box to maybe, at least in some spaces, exacerbating some of the medical disparities. How do you think about this when you can't control all of those outcomes?

[00:30:59] THOMAS CARROLL:
 Yeah, I think it's unavoidable at the end of the day, truly. Unavoidable, that risk is there, and it's going to really depend on the philosophy of those in charge at a given place. This has happened with telemedicine visits. So I do this video thing with actual patients. It's great for patients who would otherwise get no medical care. It's not as good for people that might come in, but now don't come in because the video is easier. So there are some people that are probably not getting as good medical care because the video is available. Even though it would be harder to come in, it would still be better, maybe, for that person. And the same thing is true here. If you're in a relatively resource-limited place, where, gosh, we could stretch and maybe hire some standardized patients to do this education thing, that's better than nothing. It's probably better, maybe, than just AI, maybe. And if it is, and we give up those standardized patients, we've actually gone backwards in a way. And that's the concern. And I don't know. I think, in the QI, Quality Improvement, where they call it like a balancing measure. These are unintended consequences, that when I try to change this one little piece of a system, it has far reaching effects, this ripple effect, that we can't always predict. And I think that's a really important one to keep track of, that we're not settling, if you will, for the easy thing. That's maybe not as good. That being said, if you're in some place where there SPs, Standardized Patients, are just not possible, then this is better than nothing, I suspect. But yeah, you really got to be careful about these things, because we can do real harm with them, too, yeah.

[00:32:26] EVAN SELINGER:
And here's the other big whammy. I'm sure there are people out there who, when they think about what I should do and what it shouldn't do, might see something like this as a humanizing. And you've already said several things that might count against that. You said, well, look, let's think about Federer and his ball machine. The goal isn't to create the exact same thing. The goal is to provide certain kinds of training that will pair well with other things. And you've also really described this as a complementary system. And you've mentioned that physicians have been used to dealing with actors, who are also pretending or simulating. But I could still imagine someone having either just some overall feeling, like this still feels a little bit off, or at least when the humans are doing it, they're drawing from some real, lived experience or real emotions that they might even feel in the moment. But AI has no experience. AI has no emotion. Is there anything else you would say to assuage the concern of someone who's like, well, I applaud the direction of this, and this does seem to have a little utility, but my spider sense still feels dehumanization is going on. What would you say to that?

[00:33:39] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah, I mean, I agree, in a way. I feel a little bit creeped out by just this whole, not just Sophie in particular, but just AI generally. I'm just creeped out by the whole thing. I think if I was in, whatever it was, 19th century England, I'd be smashing the looms what I mean. I do worry about that kind of thing, that I tend to be pretty conservative in this regard. I don't just jump on the bandwagon. And I get that when people feel that way. To the extent that it's dehumanizing, yeah, gosh, I guess it really depends on how it gets used. I think if it is used as a tool by which I can be a better human to my human patients, then if somebody doesn't agree with that, OK, I mean, fine. But I think that's a reasonable thing to do. And it is outside the realm of science, if you will. It's like that is a philosophical question that needs to be-- we just need to say, look, humans are important, because they're humans. And we need to use our tools to make us better able to help our human patients. And to the extent that we fail to do that, we've failed in a way that isn't the fault, if you will, of AI. It might have been I made it easier to fail or something. OK, fine. But I think it's a human failing if we fail to be humans. You know what I mean. So I think we need to just be really open about this. I think the term I've heard you say is, honest anthropomorphism, I think. Is that something along those-- To be honest, that this is not a real thing, and it's not going to be a real thing. It's the equivalent-- it's a very, very sophisticated tennis ball machine. I mean, really, if it's used that way, I think that's fine. The trouble is, though, that it starts to fool us in a way, even just subconsciously into thinking I'm talking to something that has an experience, internal experience, that I don't think it has. And then we start acting differently towards it. But this is just the AI thing generally. We get fooled by these bots all the time now, because they can call me and have a whole conversation. I don't even know it, honestly. Or maybe I start to wonder if it's weird. But they can get it. And you can almost pass the Turing test, in some ways. Yeah. I don't think it's specific to this empathy thing. I think we can train-- we can help people recognize when they see emotion, and that they should respond with empathy in this particular skill-based way, with AI in a way that I think is not dehumanizing. It will ultimately lead to more humanizing effects, I think, in the real world.

[00:35:53] EVAN SELINGER:
So just to end on this, let's think a little bit about the future. And obviously, that's also so hard to talk about because no one has a crystal ball. But as you said, AI is being used. It will continue to be used. And so as we're thinking about where that might go, what do you think? Do you imagine something like the SOPHIE project technology becoming more commonplace, becoming more widespread? But on the other hand, there are all kinds of people that are imagining a different AI future, one where AI provides less of a Copilot or less of a complement, less of a ball machine, and more of a replacement. Some people probably are imagining AI avatars of medical professionals providing consultations. Where do you see all this going?

[00:36:39] THOMAS CARROLL:
Yeah. So before AI, and I people still say this, but certainly before I became like a thing in the public consciousness, I would have people sometimes say to me, oh, computers will never replace doctors. And I would say, tell me why? Why do you say that? They say, well, they'll never be as good as a human doctor. Now, there are some studies that suggest maybe they're better in some ways, in terms of diagnosis. OK, fine. But I would say let's even say that they're not better than human doctors. I don't think they need to be. I think if I'm running a really-- and this gets dystopian, here comes-- But if I'm running a really large enterprise, like a health system, let's say, and I've got a bunch of doctors over here that have 10 units of good, they have 10 units of quality, and they cost me a bunch of money. And I have this computer system over here that's like seven units of good and cost me almost no money, the value proposition would suggest that I could, potentially at least, accept the computer that's not as good, but much, much cheaper. Now, the trouble is, if you're the person that the computer doesn't do as well with, that is not good. But if we're talking about big societal sort of changes, I do-- I am concerned, I guess, that just based on human nature, we will take the least-- the lowest energy path, essentially. And if the easiest thing to do is to say, well, I log on to, whatever, some large online retailer that currently provides humans by video chat to diagnose me, maybe that turns into an avatar someday. Maybe I say, that's fine. They've already done this, to some extent, with therapy, believe it or not. Maybe you've seen that-- maybe students have seen this, but where they'll even tell people, this is a chat bot, and you're depressed. Talk to it like a therapist. And then they come out the other end feeling better than they went in, much like they would with therapists, in a way. But then maybe we would stop telling people that. I don't know. I don't know where it's going to go. But I do think it's the Wild West at the moment, in the sense that there's very little regulation or oversight or even agreement about what this ethical landscape should look like. What was it? Google just took a thing off of their website saying that they-- initially they said they weren't going to design AI for weapons, and then they removed that. I think it was them. So, oh, where is this all going? I don't know. At the end of the day, though, this is-- I'll say-- I think I said it before, but the modern world seems to me to want to optimize outputs. And if I'm getting diagnosed with something, I want the right answer, don't get me wrong. But there's also got to be a focus on the formation of humans and the humanness of this thing. And that goes for patients and doctors. And if we lose sight of the importance of humans, then yeah, we'll just backslide or slide into this AI thing as though it's good enough. Yeah, so I hope we can keep that in mind. And again, this stuff's outside the realm of science. This is a realm of our worldview and philosophy, really truly, to say, is the human thing important enough that I'm willing to accept maybe even lower reproducibility in a way, lower reliability in some cases? And this is going to be with self-driving cars and this kind of thing. And, whatever the case may be, we're going to have to make those choices as a society. And I don't know what we're going to say.

[00:39:48] EVAN SELINGER:
I think we got to end on that, because that is the exclamation point/ and I don't think anybody can say it better. I think what you just said is very reasonable. And I think students who are thinking about maybe entering into that space between AI and healthcare should just really reflect on those concluding remarks. I think there's a lot in there.

[00:40:07] THOMAS CARROLL:
Well, thank you for having this. This was fun. I like talking about this stuff, as you know. And I hope it was useful. And I hope everybody in the course is having a good time and enjoying this whole thing.

[00:40:18] EVAN SELINGER:
Thank you.
