[00:00:02] EVAN SELINGER:
Thanks so much for talking with us today, Carlos. I am so excited about this because--

[00:00:09] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
[INAUDIBLE]

[00:00:10] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah. In this ethics of AI class that I'm teaching, we're going to be reading an article that students in the past have had a very strong response to, and it's your article. It's a co-authored article called, In principle obstacles for empathetic AI, why we can't replace human empathy in health. And I see this conversation as a way of helping them dive into that article and better understand your ideas. I think it's a very important contribution to AI scholarship. And before we even get into this, it's important, I think, for students to have a sense of who's the author, because obviously these ideas don't just pop out of nowhere. They come from people. You, like me, you're a philosophy professor. You're interested in AI. What got you interested in AI as a philosopher?

[00:01:01] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
 So I was interested in the computational theory of mind ever since I started studying philosophy. But I have a background as a lawyer, too. So I was always also very interested in regulation of several different types of activity, including technology production. So I think those two interests really shaped my interest in AI, as I currently do research on it. And they're definitely shaping the book, the themes of the book. I don't really delve that much into regulation, but I talk about the value alignment problem and what exactly does it mean that something or someone is intelligent. How does that differ from just merely saying that it's an efficient system that computes information? But I would say the sources of my interest, my very intense interest in AI started when I started reading work by [INAUDIBLE] all these guys who were just really talking about the mind. But of course, at that moment, in the late '70s, '80s, people were taking Alan Turing's idea very seriously as a thesis about the mind, the human mind. Although Turing was taking it further into what we call now artificial intelligence, general artificial intelligence. But I always find it surprising that many people that are very interested in AI, for example, in the world of how AI is changing now and how to regulate it and what general intelligence is, their source of inspiration is not this work on philosophy of mind is they go back to Turing or Von Neumann or people like that.

[00:02:59] EVAN SELINGER:
And you mentioned in your book, but students probably don't know it. And since we're not going to get a chance to read it here, but they might want to after, just real quick, what is the Prospect of a Humanitarian Artificial Intelligence all about. Because even the title humanitarian, is it suggesting human centered or human aligned? The word humanitarian, we often think about that with the Red Cross providing humanitarian relief. So what is this humanitarian AI that you're working on?

[00:03:27] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Well, this is a great question. I'm so glad you asked it. It is closer to the Red Cross interpretation because I think some of the efforts of human-centered AI think of it as AI assistance or AI pets, or some kind of helper AI that is individualized to the interests and goals of specific people. And I think that's a really bad best paradigm for artificial intelligence, particularly because this is a technology that has much more implications than assisting individual people. So I think of AI from a collective perspective. I think of intelligence as a product of humanity, not of a handful of companies producing AI pets. And since intelligence is a collectively human-based product that should help anyone, then we should think about it as a technology that requires international regulation, similarly to nuclear energy or other sources of energy that should help the planet rather than just a few people. We haven't done that. But the idea is with artificial intelligence, we have the opportunity to do that because it's still deeply unregulated, and we're still figuring out basic things, like what does copyright mean in the world of AI? How can really help people using AI technology, how to control all the resources that they are accumulating, and so on.

[00:05:09] EVAN SELINGER:
And last background, since we're going to talk about this article, how did you get from all of those things to writing about AI in a health context?

[00:05:18] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
So this was a little bit serendipitous, as many of our research agendas are. I've always been interested in philosophy of technology. But I was never really very interested in the ethics of technology until very recently, where I started thinking about value within epistemology. What are the values that you should have in science? What are the values that you should have just in general in a society? What is the status of the public sphere in shaping those values. These are big topics in political philosophy. I mean, the serendipity of my route into medical ethics was that a collaborator and colleague of mine, Averil Fairweather, who whom I've worked with on epistemology, social epistemology based on attention rather than typically propositional attitude, belief-based epistemology-- I mean, we don't deny that you need that. But our focus is centered on attention. He had a colleague at Berkeley, Jody Halpern, who's one of our co-authors, who is an expert in medical ethics and knows a lot about philosophy. So we started talking a lot. And then eventually, we started thinking about the paper and we wrote it. And so far, it's going well. I think it's important to have this discussion in the field of Medicine and I think it has implications for other debates.

[00:06:58] EVAN SELINGER:
I think so, too. I mean, profound, and let's get into that now. So your article is about empathy. And I want to start off because I think some people might have some misunderstandings about empathy. Before we even get into all the big stuff, you point out that empathy matters in health care, not in a very squishy way, but it actually can lead to very specific, tangible, practical outcomes. So what is empathy good for in health care? Why do we want it?

[00:07:27] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
 Good question. I think there's this pretty cynical view that medicine falls within the realm of things that you can optimize, and that it's expensive. You hear it all the time. Our medical system is too expensive, it's too big, it doesn't work. And then some folks in AI think that, or interpret this as, yeah, part of the problem is that there's too much human interaction in the medical field. If we could cut a lot of that, the system would be more efficient. I think that's a big mistake. I think, yes, AI can help optimize the medical system, but the role of empathy in medicine is really important because it gives the interaction between doctor and patient a basic moral and epistemic grounding. So let's focus a little bit on the epistemic grounding, a level of knowledge of immediate needs that the patient may have that a fully optimized system will never have. And there's risks involved in that. We can talk about them. But depriving the patient from the very opportunity to have some kind of human connection, I think, is a betrayal of medical care and empathy is the basis of that care.

[00:08:53] EVAN SELINGER:
On a very practical level, I feel like in the article you point out things like empathy helps patients open up more to doctors because they feel more connected, and so they might be more willing to disclose uncomfortable, say, symptoms or behavioral patterns. It might make them more likely to go to an appointment. It might make them more likely to stay on top of whatever regimen their doctors give us. So above and beyond, we're coming through that foundation that you talk about. It seems like a lot of things that we would want as just very clear, good, medical outcomes are very much enhanced by empathy. Is that right?

[00:09:35] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Yes. And these are epistemic goods that empathy provides, so knowledge of the current situation of the patient, information that they're not very willing to disclose. Then there's also a moral dimension to it. And the moral dimension is that the medical field is about saving people's lives and caring for their lives in a way that is genuine and not purely strategic. So if medicine, as a field, becomes a strategic field for controlling the information of patients and getting them through the system, we are dehumanizing medicine, basically. So these deeper moral role of empathy within medicine has to do with the very definition of what medicine is.

[00:10:22] EVAN SELINGER:
So this thing that gets to the heart of medicine that could avoid dehumanization, this thing called empathy. One of the great things that you do in this paper, and I know you don't invent these ideas, but you don't leave empathy squishy, in fact, you say, we can really talk about empathy in specific ways. And you divide aspects of empathy into emotional empathy, cognitive empathy, motivational empathy. What is each of these components like? Can you explain what each one entails and maybe give an example of what it would mean for someone to have in a clinical medical context emotional empathy and then cognitive empathy and motivational empathy?

[00:11:02] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Sure. So empathy is obviously a very big field in cognitive neuroscience and psychology. And there's a very important view within the field that says that empathy is bad. It's just morally bad. It's just bad news. It's archaic, part of an archaic primitive system, where we become empathic and want to help only people within our group, and that this is something that is negative in the larger scale, the ethical.

[00:11:35] EVAN SELINGER:
So the concern is that empathy is only selectively triggered so that a doctor will feel empathetic, but we shouldn't get too excited about that or idealize it because they won't feel equally empathetic to all patients?

[00:11:49] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Exactly. And because of that, empathy can be the source of bias and prejudice against people that you don't like. Against this view, some researchers have pointed out that what happens is that there's different kinds of empathy. So this empathy that is strategic, where you're using your cognitive capacities to help people that are like you and you're using reasoning that is very explicit, that's cognitive empathy. Cognitive empathy reads the mental states of other people, predicts their mental state, their behavior, uses-- pretty much like what social media algorithms do, they use that information to predict what you're going to do next. And then you use that strategically.

[00:12:40] EVAN SELINGER:
For a doctor, how would a doctor display cognitive empathy?

[00:12:44] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
They would, for example, just read charts or read MRIs and strategically predict what the patient has. All that is perfectly fine from an epistemic point of view. But without having any attachment to the patient whatsoever or caring about their well-being, this would be just a mere strategy of utility calculation, like improving your bank account or something like that. That's fine. And it's a kind of empathy because you are using your mind reading capacities to put yourself into the shoes of the person you're trying, or the group you're trying, to predict their behavior. But empathy is more nuanced than that. So empathy, for example, in the animal world is never just like that. So there's a lot of research showing that empathy is also something that can-- oh, and, by the way, motivational empathy is the kind of empathy that leads you to action. It's not just that you're calculating and predicting. You're actually going out there and helping people. But again, you can help them strategically, too.

[00:14:00] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's pause on that. So cognitive empathy will give you a sense of what's going on with someone. But you might not necessarily feel disposed to want to do anything about that to help them. Motivational empathy is that drive or push to want to help them. And what's emotional empathy, which we didn't get into, what does that give us?

[00:14:18] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
So emotional empathy can lead to that, can lead to action, but it's a lot less strategic. It's actually not strategic at all. You can be emotionally empathic in ways that really affect your utility calculation. And that's the point of empathy, that you're empathic to your family and your friends and people in need, not because you are going to use them strategically to achieve a goal, but because you feel their pain. You feel their needs. You want to help them because you know that you can improve their situation, and you feel bad if you don't do that. So emotional empathy, the source of it is how you feel given that another person is in pain or suffering. And interestingly, these were the feelings that were the basis of utilitarianism, but also Adam Smith's theory of ethics. I say, interestingly because then they emphasize a lot, the utility calculus. But the source of the empathy is not the calculus. It is this feeling that you have. And in contemporary neuroscience, they distinguish between these two. And I think that's a very important distinction, because doctors can have either of these forms of empathy. And we, as humans, can also have both. And when we lack, completely, emotional empathy, our behavior becomes psychopathic. So we become strategic manipulators of emotions of other people without absolutely caring whatsoever about them and their well-being.

[00:15:57] EVAN SELINGER:
So the ideal doctor has all three, because they would appropriately understand what's happening with the patient, that would be the cognitive empathy, they would emotionally feel properly attuned to that patient, and that emotional attunement would lead to the right type of action through motivational empathy. Is that how we connect all three dimensions?

[00:16:19] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Correct. This is very, very good. And this is a very important point. Thanks for mentioning it, because I think it's an easy way to misinterpret the paper. And I think some people have understood the paper in this slightly incorrect way, which is that, oh, medicine really should care about emotional empathy, and the other empathy is kind of dangerous. That's not the point at all. You need the three of them. But with a fully optimized system, where AI is in charge of it, What you're doing is literally eliminating the emotional component. And that's the risk. Because without the emotional component, the care that you are providing is at best a farcical pretense of care, and at worst, something that literally can damage a bunch of people.

[00:17:17] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's get into this. So you talk about how having these three connected opens up something very important for doctors and for human beings. It's what you call taking the second-person perspective. And for students who aren't familiar with that, what is-- we all know the first-person perspective. That's what it's like for me. Right now, I'm having this conversation with you on Zoom, and I know what it's like for me to be talking to you, Carlos. That's my perspective. We can understand what a third person perspective would be. Maybe that would be a view from nowhere. Like if someone were to be writing and Evan and Carlos were having this conversation going back and forth, someone completely outside of us just sort of narrating, would that be the third person perspective?

[00:17:59] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Yes.

[00:18:00] EVAN SELINGER:
So what's the second-person perspective that this kind of empathy opens up?

[00:18:04] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Good. So this is very important. And we actually take this point from the very important work of Jodi Halpern in medical ethics. And she wrote a book about this. And she argues for the second person perspective on the basis of her interpretation of many authors, but mainly the philosopher Wittgenstein, Ludwig Wittgenstein, who had many criticisms that are very interesting. We shouldn't get into that. But the idea is exactly what you said. The first-person perspective is me, the way I see the world, my interpretation of you. The way I feel about you. The third-person perspective is the descriptions that I have of you, including you as a set of facts. Your behavior, your predispositions, your genetic information, everything that is factual about you, including algorithmic predictions of what you're going to do next, are all third person perspective evaluations of you. And what she says, is in medicine and in contexts of care, you can't have-- that's not sufficient these two perspectives, because you want something that is less selfish than evaluations of you on the basis of me and what I think about myself because then I'm trapped in my own psychology. And I really don't care about you. I care about how I feel about you, not about you. And I can't also just depend on the third-person evaluation, where all I have is a collection of facts about you as if you were a information device. So to really care about you in a deeper sense, in an empathic way, and this is what is, supposedly, needed in medicine, or not supposedly, this is what medicine is supposed to be about according to the definition of medicine, because it's the care for the life of a patient, you need a perspective that she and other authors call the second-person perspective, because it's in between you as a set of facts that I can use for calculating and optimizing your behavior and my responses to your behavior and my own perspective, where all I care is about how I feel about you. This in between is how can I link my emotions, my psychological overall well-being as such, as a person.

[00:20:36] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah. So when we say, put myself in your shoes, this is what we're talking about? We're not saying, I'm going to be in your headspace, in your shoes, nor am I just saying I'm understanding things just as they are for me, but myself in your shoes captures that second-person point of view?

[00:20:55] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Yes. And the important aspect of that is that it's literally your shoes. I'm really caring for you, not about-- I'm caring for you, rather than I'm caring about how I feel about you.

[00:21:10] EVAN SELINGER:
And you connect that to attention? You say there's so much to do here with this relation between empathy and attention. And you link attention to something you call affective resonance. So what role does attention play in empathy? And how does attention create conditions of possibility for this affective resonance to happen? What's going on here?

[00:21:35] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
That's an excellent question. So in the paper, we're not very explicit about this. But if you think about it, these three forms of empathy are forms of attending to you. I can attend to you as a set of facts in order to predict what you're going to do. From the third person perspective, I know that you're a person, that you have rights, and all that, but I just think of you as a bunch of information. I can think of you by attending to my goals, my interests, my impressions about you, and how I feel about you. Or I can attend to you as such, to you in your individual integrity as a person. Those are different things. And the idea is, when I attend to you and your needs or the way you feel, rather than the way I feel about you or how I can interpret facts about you, what I'm doing is that my emotional life, my emotional affinities, start resonating with yours. The way you feel affects the way I feel. And my affective responses to the way you feel also affect yours, in the ideal situation. We get to know each other through how we are resonating effectively with one another. And this turns out to be very important in conversations, where you care about the honesty and sincerity of someone, you care about whether the person is looking at you. We have these cues, for example, you can call them second-person cues, where I'm not thinking, oh, I'm having this monologue, and I'm matching my monologue with Evan's monologue, or I'm predicting what Evan's going to say the way I predict what a chatbot is going to say. I'm looking at you. I'm looking at your expressions, I'm looking at your eye, we're making eye contact through the screen. These are cues about, yeah, we care about this conversation. We're not just manipulating each other. If all of a sudden, you start feeling uncomfortable-- if this were a different kind of situation, different kind of circumstance, where you are expressing some view that is affecting you, I need to change the tone of the conversation and appeal to different emotions. And I cannot do that just from the first-person or the third-person perspective. So that's why this attention that goes to you in particular, rather than to me or to third-person perspective is so crucial in general, but also in medicine. And a doctor would be completely deprived of very essential information if she didn't have this kind of access to the patient's emotions. And the thing that I forgot to mention is this idea of attention, as a source of-- most important source of knowledge of a person comes from Iris Murdoch. I mean, she is at least one of the philosophers that talks a lot about this in the sovereignty of goods, but also in other writings.

[00:24:36] EVAN SELINGER:
Meaning moral attention?

[00:24:38] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Moral attention, exactly.

[00:24:40] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's get to the big claim before we get into some of the risks. And the big claim here, once we pack all of these things together, we understand why these three dimensions of empathy are so important. You make the claim, it's in the title of the paper, that it's not just that AI in its current forms can't do all three, lacks access to the second-person perspective. The fact that you call this an in-principle argument. This is the boldest of possible claims. This is a way of saying that you believe this argument that you're making, that AI won't be able to do this today, tomorrow, five years from now, what's the fundamental gap?

[00:25:24] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Good. Yeah, this is definitely the boldest claim is the less popular. It's very controversial. Most people think you shouldn't make this kind of claim about the future. And, first of all, a qualification that is in the paper is that it's not as strong as John Searle's claim that strong AI is impossible. It's also an in-principle claim. His claim is that because AI systems are not conscious, they lack meaning. And the famous claim that syntax is not sufficient for semantics entails that no kind of machine can be intelligent. That's not the claim of the paper. And I get more into in detail about these differences in the book, in the humanitarian AI book. It's an important nuance because the idea is we're not denying that AI systems in medicine are going to be super intelligent, and they're going to be super helpful in many, many interesting ways. The claim is they won't be empathic. And because they're not empathic, they will create risks that are bad for medicine. Their use in medicine should be very controlled. They should be used, but not for all instances of medical care. That's the claim. It's very bold because it's for all kinds of AI.

[00:26:45] EVAN SELINGER:
And why can't they be empathic? Why is that perspective foreclosed?

[00:26:50] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
So they can be very intelligent but not empathic. That could be interpreted as they will have cognitive empathy. And, again, I'm more explicit about this in the books than in the paper. They will have cognitive empathy. Some algorithms already have some version of cognitive empathy. But they will lack the emotional resonance empathy, because that kind of empathy requires a very sophisticated emotional system that, in the case of humans, evolves as part of our evolution in life. And it's a very important subset of our mental life that completely depends on our biology, this emotional system.

[00:27:32] EVAN SELINGER:
So an AI system could, in a very sophisticated way, use cognitive empathy to say, hey, based on these bits of evidence and this information, a patient seems to be in distress. And then it could predict that a way to make a patient feel better is to say something reassuring. But what you believe, and I'm just making sure of this, an AI system, in principle, won't be able to do is feel something towards that patient. And without that feeling, so we're losing the emotional empathy, motivational empathy, which flows from emotional empathy will be missing. So the only possibility with empathy is not that there's no empathy, but that it's limited to mere cognitive empathy. Is that the claim?

[00:28:30] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
 That's exactly right. That's completely correct. Exactly right. What is important about this, and this is probably the first thing that is unethical about this use of cognitive empathy at the cost of eliminating emotional empathy, is that when we seek care, when we're in a situation of care or in a situation of emotional resonance, when we seek someone that corresponds to us because we love them, we're falling in love, the kind of empathy that we seek is not the cognitive type. It's the emotional type. So if I'm falling in love, I don't want the other person to tell, oh, I know exactly what you're going to say, and I can predict exactly what you're going to say, and I can manipulate you in all these ways. That's where things get a little bit closer to psychopathy. What I care about is the emotional resonance. Yeah, I love you or I don't love you. Really, that don't resonate with you. And I can predict what you're going to do and all that. And many people are fascinated with how people are falling in love with avatars and how you can use avatars for context of care. But I think that's a betrayal of this expectation that the expectation when we enter-- if you think about it, this is the most important context of our lives, our families, our well-being, our medical health, or health, falling in love, our relationships with professors, with teachers, with mentors. When what we expect of them is some degree, or at least the very possibility, of emotional resonance. And if we don't have that, we're betraying that expectation. And by doing that, we're dehumanizing the context of care and well-being that we developed, as humans, for bonding with each other and for helping each other.

[00:30:36] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's bring this to the problems that you then bring up with simulations of empathy, where a bot has enough cognitive empathy to make it seem as if it is interacting with us in a way that it cares. And you just suggest that you're talking about love. But let's bring it back to the clinical encounter. You talk about the problems of deception and misrepresentation. So if a patient were, say, using a therapy bot and the therapy bot said something to the effect of like, you're making great progress, I'm very proud of you. Would that be deceptive? Would that be misrepresenting?

[00:31:18] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Yes, that would be deceptive. In a conversation, for example, where you are just pretending to say that without being honest, that would already be deceptive. But in the context of an AI, the robot has no emotions, so it is deceptive in a deeper way. And this is a very important point. The deception that you get with AI systems is probably the most grotesque kind of deception that we've encountered in conversational settings, because it's not just that the bot has no capacity to pretend that it cares about you, because it has no emotions whatsoever. I have the capacity to pretend that I care for you because I know what care means. Robots don't have that capacity. And so here the pretense comes from a company. A company that pretends to care about you through a product that absolutely doesn't care about you. So neither the company nor the bot really care about you. So it's a double deception, and it's a commercial based deception. So I don't know if this is a triple deception. You're being deceived at various levels of deception. And it's not just at the conversational level where the deception is occurring. It's also at the care level. And the implication here is there's a risk of being deceived, patients feeling good when actually they're not being cared for. They shouldn't feel good because they're not really being cared for. But also things like, OK, I'm depressed. What should I do? Well, why don't you just think about killing yourself. That risk is coming from the deception, but from the deception at a level where it's a company that is providing the pretense of care rather than a human being.

[00:33:17] EVAN SELINGER:
How does this relate to misrepresentation?

[00:33:19] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Yes.

[00:33:21] EVAN SELINGER:
How would you connect that?

[00:33:23] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Sorry, that was the question. It is related to misrepresentation because in a-- so let's start with what I'm calling the first level of deception. If I'm pretending to be friendly to you, and I say, I'm going to help you with this, and I really care about you, and I really don't care about you, I want to manipulate you, that's the psychopathic part of it, but I'm very good at knowing what you feel, I'm creating a context of misrepresentation because you're representing me as someone who is resonating with you, someone who is attending to you as a person. I'm not. I'm attending to you as a set of facts that I need to manipulate you. There's a second level, when you talk about AI. So, I mean, I'm talking this as a first level because this is a level that we have available as humans and that we use it all the time, especially in the market-fueled set of interactions that we have with social media. We commercialize our attention, we commercialize our interactions, and we pretend to care when we don't care. So that's already a misrepresentation of care. But with AI, you get-- I'm not sure if it's two more levels or at least one more level, which is the avatar is not an agent. The avatar is an interface, literally an interface, between you and a company. So when you think that this bot cares about you, that's a second misrepresentation, because there's no such thing as the bot who cares about you. It's a company with an interface with you that is using your information to make some profit. And then what could potentially be another level of misrepresentation is that the information the company has is to help users. And that's also, in most cases, false, because it's not a specific user that they want to help. It's just they want to make money. So I think this is all very important to really assess the misrepresentation of using AI in medical context.

[00:35:39] EVAN SELINGER:
And you articulate concern that this combination of deception and misrepresentation can have two really bad, very pernicious causal consequences. One, you talk about the risk of undermining genuine empathy, and another, you talk about how, maybe, in the medical context, resources could end up being poorly allocated as a result of not understanding this problem. How could these things happen? Why do we need to worry about real, genuine empathy getting undermined? Why do we need to worry about money flowing to systems that are misrepresenting as opposed to those resources being better spent?

[00:36:23] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Yeah. I think for the first question, we already have a pretty dehumanized medical system, where a lot of the care is filtered through bureaucracies, and it's fueling drug addiction. I mean, there's all sorts of problems with the health system, particular in the US. Removing the very few areas of effective resonance that the medical system has for patients would be completely tragic. So I think of that as a very big risk. The allocation problem is interesting because all the resources that are mismanaged now, if instead of being used correctly for preventive medicine, for creating more context of care, where patients feel more genuine emotional resonance rather than fake pretense, if the money goes to AI programs with these three levels of deception, rather than to projects for rehumanizing or improving medicine in a more humane, empathic way, that would be a misuse of resources for the medical system because then doctors would be-- I mean, we're seeing in education that today, doctors would be replaced by automatic bureaucracies that have no real empathic interest in the well-being of patients. And that's why I think it's a misuse of taxpayer money and misuse of resources.

[00:38:14] EVAN SELINGER:
So as we wind this down, you also note, despite all of these very principled concerns, you're not willing to say there's no utility. In fact, you come up with a word, you take empathy, and then you give it an asterisk. You're like, this simulated empathy, this empathy asterisk, it does have a time and a place and a very set limited number of functions that actually probably are pretty good. But what are they? How might one benefit without crossing over into the things that are deeply concerning?

[00:38:52] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
So I think this term, a very, very good cognitively empathic system, could be good news for a lot of medicine because it would help with overwhelming circumstances where doctors just don't have time to respond to patients on time, helping with emails to patients that need a response that sounds empathic, that would make them feel better. Notice that even that is a little bit creepy, because an email that is fake can convey emotions that should not be conveyed, probably, in a situation of care. I mean, and, as you say, we call it empathy asterisk, or empathy star, and the idea is it could be helpful in contexts where care is not at the basis of the interaction. So if you're interacting with a patient, you're a nurse, you're a doctor, and what is needed there is effective resonance, then you shouldn't use these systems there. But you can use them in other parts of the bureaucracy, where doctors are completely overwhelmed by the number of patients. I mean, this is not empathic AI. This is just AI in general. AI can be revolutionary in scanning documents, going through big databases, coming up with new drugs, coming up-- I mean, they're very useful systems. It's just in this specific context of care that they shouldn't replace the human component.

[00:40:33] EVAN SELINGER:
And I want us to consider, before we think about the future, one objection, and a possible objection, that when I talked about your article with students in class, this is something that comes up in ethics quite a bit, and it wasn't surprising here. And a typical objection to an ethical argument says, hey, the person who's making the argument is making lots of assumptions about what's good and right for people. But they're pushing it too far. They're not really thinking about everybody. So the objection here says, but wait a minute. Wait a minute, Carlos. What if you're the type of person who says, I get what you're saying. But for me, what matters is just how I feel. And so I could imagine not wanting to talk to this person, says a human therapist, because that makes me feel very emotional. I don't want to have to tell another person who really could understand all the things that makes me uncomfortable. If I could talk to a bot and get things off my chest, and the bot could dispense clinically-sound advice while saying things that are technically not true, like great work, you're doing well, I care about you. Way to go. If somebody would feel sufficiently good inside and go, oh, it's doing it for me. That's motivating me to stay with the program. What's wrong with that? What if that person says that's good enough?

[00:42:05] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Yeah. Now, this is a fair point. Yeah. I had a student who said, who are you to tell me how to feel about my avatar? Yeah I'm not saying you shouldn't develop emotions. I mean, this is very important. I mean, it's a good objection. As long as you know that-- I mean, so people bring, yeah, hair or movies where you develop this attachment to. It's called the ELIZA effect. People were told ELIZA was a very basic program, and they were explicitly told--

[00:42:42] EVAN SELINGER:
[INAUDIBLE] original Joseph Weizenbaum chatbot that pretended to be a Rogerian psychotherapist.

[00:42:47] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Exactly. And people would get into the room privately and talk to her. And the researchers were horrified by this. And that's because we have the tendency to empathize with whatever-- we empathize with animals, with our pets with. We even change our voice when we talk to our pets. And when we talk to infants, we do these little sounds and we change our tones of conversation. So we have a very strong disposition to empathize. It's evolutionary based. It's robust. There's nothing wrong, I think, with interfaces and interactions in which you develop not only emotions, but emotional attachment to avatars or whatever fictional characters. What is wrong is to pretend that you are somehow going beyond that, and that you are actually now getting into the realm of genuine empathic resonance or affective resonance. I think that's where things get risky, and if you're in the world of regulating AI, where there's real danger of unethical behavior. I mean, this is what I'm saying, what I was trying to articulate before. When we enter in a relation of any kind, we seek the three types of empathy. But we want to be at least in the position to interact in terms of affective resonance. We expect that. We want that from a relationship. And if that is precluded, if that's impossible, if that's not part of the deal, then I think it's important to be aware of that. And you can feel good thinking that someone tells you that you're great at this or great at that, or that you should feel this way or this other way. But the risk is that expectation is going to be unfulfilled. It's going to stay unfulfilled. And because of that, you are being manipulated, and you are more susceptible of being manipulated in the future.

[00:45:06] EVAN SELINGER:
Two last things, Carlos, where this is all so good. So let's imagine students come away from this conversation we're having. They read the article. They feel very motivated that you're on to something very important, but they're going to end up getting a job in medical AI. What can they do? If they're motivated by these insights and become practitioners in the field, what advice would you have?

[00:45:31] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
 I think, I mean, this is going to be a real problem very soon. I think they have the possibility of working through the bureaucracies themselves, identifying contexts in which cognitive empathy is enough and when it can become risky, how to help doctors with the emotional cost, the deep cost of being empathic all the time, that's a big topic in the empathy literature, and identifying context of care, where genuine care is not affected by new technologies that are going to replace that, because we already have a medical system that is highly bureaucratized and where care is a big part of the problem. So working within the system to identify these three aspects of motivational, cognitive, and affective empathy could be very useful, and it could have-- it can scale up to the entire medical system for preventive medicine, for different aspects of medicine, medical care, care in different parts of the medical world, doctors, but also nurses. And how to interact with AI companies will be easier if these three realms of medicine are clearly distinguished.

[00:46:59] EVAN SELINGER:
OK. Now let's see. What's on your horizon? Are you building off this? Are you going in different directions? Where are your new or upcoming AI projects going to be located?

[00:47:10] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
I'm trying to work a little bit more on this epistemic aspect of empathy and AI. I'm also trying to develop a little bit more the value alignment, regulatory parts of the book, the humanitarian book, and the idea of a humanitarian AI, how exactly-- what components will be very important for that. I'm worried a lot about communication and the public sphere and sincerity and honesty in the public sphere, which are part of our emotional resonance. So yeah, that's what I'm doing now.

[00:47:54] EVAN SELINGER:
Thank you very much, Carlos.

[00:47:56] CARLOS MONTEMAYOR:
Oh, you're very welcome, Evan.
