[00:00:02] EVAN SELINGER:
So it is so great to talk with you today, Megan Fritts. Like me, you are a professional philosopher and in the ethics of AI course that I'm teaching, the students are going to be reading a really important article that you co-wrote. It's called AI Recruitment, Algorithms, and the Dehumanization Problem. And the reason we're talking today is I want to set the tone to help them better understand your ideas, why this article is an important contribution to AI ethics, and, of course, give them a little sense that behind every idea there's a person and a person with a research agenda, so let's just start off on that. You're also a philosophy professor. What sparked your interest in AI ethics?

[00:00:43] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, so my research in general, and if anyone were to read my resume, they would see that I write on a lot of different things that seem kind of disconnected, but overall, I'm interested in these really broad questions about human health, happiness, and agency, and that's kind of what connects most of what I write. So initially, I got into technology ethics through thinking about the problem of misinformation. This was quite a while ago, 2015, 2016, back when that was just starting to become a really big concern. And eventually, well, actually not-- pretty soon after getting interested in misinformation, I realized what I actually need to be interested in is learning about artificial intelligence algorithms, large language models, because the misinformation markets that we're experiencing today in our interactions on social media and elsewhere are largely mediated by and given to us, really by these algorithms, so that's how I got into thinking about AI, thinking about algorithms, and what eventually led to me writing this paper with my co-author.

[00:01:53] EVAN SELINGER:
Why this one in particular? So we'll obviously unpack the ideas in a minute, but what was so interesting, particularly when we talked about this with the students in person, so many AI ethics, principles, and values, dehumanization isn't on there. This is really giving us something new to think about. What led you in particular to focus on this topic of hiring algorithms where this came up?

[00:02:15] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, so I don't remember exactly. We were reading some literature for a different project we were working on. I honestly can't remember what it was, but we just came across these interviews with people working at some big companies like Fortune 500 companies and medical technology, especially, I think. And they were talking about using AI in the hiring process is just like another area where AI was becoming useful, and hearing some of the managers talk about their concerns with AI being used in this process and why it might make candidates feel like maybe they're not valued, or maybe people don't-- maybe people aren't really paying attention to them. If they're already not valued, not paid attention to at the stage in the process, what will it be like to work for this company? So we just sort of-- I think we just thought, oh, well, that's a really interesting area where this kind of vague concern that I think we have about AI in general, that it kind of replaces humans with non-humans in a way that feels weird, feels off a lot of the time. This is an interesting, specific example of that happening.

[00:03:33] EVAN SELINGER:
And let's dive into this. And I think just to set the stage, probably nobody who's in a course like this needs to be told that AI is being used in the hiring process. People have so much experience at this point. People are worried about not only trying to beat the algorithm, but being ghosted by companies who are using the-- OK, but when you co-wrote this article, what in particular was happening? How was AI being used in the hiring process?

[00:03:58] MEGAN FRITTS:
For the most part, where AI was being used when we wrote this article was kind of just in the initial culling of the applications. So someone post a job, you get maybe 50, 60 applications. If you're a job opening for a philosophy professor, maybe you get 700 and you-- so you gather them all, and then maybe a human doesn't want to have to do the first cut, because that's just a lot of busy work, a lot of checking to make sure that they meet kind of the standard basic requirements for the job, and AI goes in and makes that initial cut. But there was a lot of discussion about increasing the presence of AI in the hiring process, so in particular conducting interviews, virtual interviews was starting to be a thing, and using AI in the initial job training the job training work as well.

[00:05:06] EVAN SELINGER:
And let's talk about those interviews. I mean, a lot of people have experience taking interviews online. And when you wrote this article, I think one of the most interesting things is you begin not with what a philosopher would think, but you actually talk about human resource professionals, and you note that they have a particular concern and that their language, which is language that we find in philosophy sometimes, is some of these human resource professionals were worried about the process dehumanizing, hiring. What were they talking about? Why did they see dehumanization as a serious issue?

[00:05:45] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, so I think for dehumanization is kind of a loaded term because we use it in a lot of different ways. We use it-- we can talk about dehumanizing an entire group of persons, maybe a religious group, or a people of a particular sexual orientation, or particular ethnicity. So we use dehumanization in this really loaded, thick way sometimes, but then sometimes we just talk about it to mean that someone feels like they're not treated as they ought to be treated, given that they are a human person. And even further, sometimes we can talk about dehumanizing, not people, but things like processes the hiring process, so maybe things that should have a human element to them has had that human element removed. I think that was the main worry of HR professionals is that this needs to be a process where there's a person involved with sifting through the candidates because it's what human job candidates deserve. There's something about being a person with human dignity that merits being approached by another person, and that by taking the person out of that process, there was a kind of dehumanization going on.

[00:07:10] EVAN SELINGER:
OK, so human resource professionals themselves, they felt that engaging in this was doing something to the hiring process, and they used this language of dehumanization. And your point is they weren't talking about it in the sense of treating candidates as subhuman or the way we might associate with dehumanizing someone. You said in a racist context, or in a religious context, but it was about removing the human presence. So one issue that always comes up when we talk about this, is this introducing something new, or did we have any kind of dehumanization prior to either AI or online interviews? Because people often talk about interviews as being uncomfortable, as feeling that they're being judged, as feeling that they're being reduced to just a set of credentials, so is this something new in this space?

[00:08:01] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, great. And probably Franz Kafka is the one who brings this phenomenon to light in literature. This idea that people often feel like COGS in a machine in their work, and that this is nothing new. This is really, really as old as human employment probably. This experience of being a worker who's not valued for their humanity, who feels like they can't ever maybe connect with the people at their work in a way where they feel really seen, so maybe they do feel like their work was dehumanized before I had any part in the hiring process, the training process, or the job at all. I think something though, that introducing AI does to further dehumanize is it kind of takes out the potential to fix that problem. So without AI, a job might be or a hiring process might be dehumanized in the sense that the humans who are involved in the hiring process are kind of checked out. They're not really caring about the candidates that much. They're just going through the motions mechanically, and this could have a negative effect on the employees or the potential employees, for sure. But as long as it's still humans doing that, there's still the potential to rehumanize it, to really be a human in that practice, and to bring real human values into that work. When you replace the human element with an algorithm, that potential is lost.

[00:09:44] EVAN SELINGER:
And in terms of potential introduce an idea called artificial values. And you say that the AI is introducing artificial values into hiring. What does that mean?

[00:09:54] MEGAN FRITTS:
So artificial values in the literature on this, a lot of it-- a lot of that comes from C. T. Nguyen's work. A good way to illustrate artificial values is to think about the things you value when you are playing a board game, or any kind of game, really. We decide to play a game, and let's give an example, we decide to play Horseshoes, and now I'm having a hard time thinking of games. We decide to play horseshoes. I now have a value for getting this horseshoe really close to the stake in the ground. I think that's how you play horseshoes. This is not something I would value if I'm not playing horseshoes. It's not something I would care about at all, probably. But since I decided to play horseshoes, now I do have a value for getting this piece of metal that's supposed to be on a horse's hoof close to this metal stake in the ground. That makes sense in a game. We value things that help us win because we just choose to. A person makes the game. They determine what the goal is, and based on that goal, if we choose to play the game, we have decided for a little bit to value those things. But those sorts of values that we have when playing games, they're very different than the sorts of values that we have when we're not engaged in game play. When I'm just going about my life, the values that I have are not really clear to me a lot of the time, like my values and gameplay are. Sometimes my values conflict. I might have a value for getting more riding in a certain day, but also a value for taking my kids to the park, and those things are in conflict, because maybe I only have a couple hours and I can only pick one and sometimes they're just not clear to us what they are at all. So artificial values are values that we can take on that are clear, non-conflicting, but not the sorts of-- they lack the characteristics of real human values. This isn't always bad. Sometimes it's really great to play games, but when we have artificial values for things that we should have genuine values for, that can be a problem.

[00:12:11] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's talk about that with an example, because you mentioned that some of this was inspired by Nguyen's work on gamifying Twitter, but you give your own example. You and your co-author give an example in the context of this paper. And it's interesting because the example goes in a different direction, I think, than most people might think when they start reading it. You talk about a ballet dancer, she's auditioning for a company, and she ends up being evaluated by AI systems, and it almost felt like there was a zig zag here because then I was expecting that she was going to be denied the job and very upset and trying to figure out what it is that the algorithm missed, but instead she actually gets the job, but she gets the job and instead of this being a happy ending, she feels a bit uneasy about this. Why? And what does this example tell us about these artificial values?

[00:13:03] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, so we chose the example of a ballet dancer because ballet is an activity that's supremely humane. It's very squarely in what we would consider the humanities. So by that I mean that the value of ballet, of dancing as an art, is the value of changing and molding us as viewers of it in the way that the artist wants to, which is maybe for the purpose of pointing us towards some particular aesthetic good. So we have these very humane aims of ballet and art in general, and they don't-- it doesn't seem like those things are properly evaluable by AI, because AI is not the proper recipient of the kinds of values that this art is offering to us. So even if the dancer was chosen by AI and she gets this job that she wants, she might feel, and we think rightly, that she wasn't really able to perform her art because she didn't really have an audience that was able to receive what she was giving, and so then she wasn't really chosen on the basis of it at all.

[00:14:13] EVAN SELINGER:
 But what does this tell us about other kinds of things because you just emphasize artistry here? So does this tell us something about a computer science application or a cybersecurity application? How generalizable is this concern?

[00:14:27] MEGAN FRITTS:
 Yeah, that's great. So certainly some things are going to be-- we might think of the ballet dancer as presenting both an instance of feeling dehumanized in the hiring process and an instance where AI is really not even appropriate in the hiring process to any extent. And maybe for some kinds of work, it is more appropriate if I'm applying for a job as a coder and AI needs to sift through my application materials, we might think, well, I would be great at this. But I think no matter what the job is, there's going to be aspects of it that fall into this category of humane things. Even if I'm applying for a job to be a coder, it's not-- if there's a human evaluating my applications, they're not going to only look at my proficiency as a coder. That's maybe the main thing they're looking at or the thing that they take to be the most important. But in fact, if a human is looking at my application or interviewing me, they are taking in other information as well that's going to bear on their decision about whether or not to hire me. They're taking in stuff about my personality, about how well they connect with me, because in the employee employer relationship, this is important to have at least personalities that aren't constantly at odds with one another. They're taking in information about how comfortable I seem in social settings or in under pressure, maybe, and these things are all judgment calls that are really, really difficult for AIs to make. It's what people have found, at least as of now, is that AI is still pretty much not that great at making calls that humans often make on the basis of what they might call their gut, if that makes sense. So another example of this is in banking. In banking they use algorithms to look for suspicious patterns of spending in people's accounts, but they always have before they say, issue an alert. They have human branch that looks it over because AI is not that good at identifying actually suspicious patterns from actually not suspicious patterns. So same thing with the hiring process for jobs. AI might be really good at judging just this one thing that the job is about say coding, but all of these other things that go into choosing a candidate to hire, it's probably still going to have artificial values for those things where it needs to have human ones.

[00:17:09] EVAN SELINGER:
And you connect this concern, not just to a concept in philosophy and not just to something that HR professionals were talking about, but they were linking it up to where you were, showing that their concern could be linked up to something called stakeholder theory. I think that's a new idea for so many people who have become so cynical about business. What is stakeholder theory and how does it apply here?

[00:17:33] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, I don't know if it's so much a new idea as it is a widely rejected one, unfortunately. Yeah, so stakeholder theory is one theory of the moral obligations of businesses. So the stakeholder theory claims that businesses have moral obligations to all their stakeholders, where a stakeholder is just anyone who is kind of causally affected by that business. This theory is in contrast to something called the shareholder theory, which says that the business only has moral obligations to its shareholders, and specifically, the obligation is to maximize the profits of the shareholders. So whereas the shareholder theory says no, the moral obligations of businesses do not extend past maximizing the profit of the shareholders. The stakeholder theory says, well, actually, beyond the shareholders, the business also has obligations to say, people in the town whose environment might be affected by a factory, or people in the broader region who might be affected by the economy given that, say, this business is creating a monopoly in some industry. Anyone who might be causally affected by this business is a subject to these moral obligations. So in this picture, the company does actually have moral obligations to its employees rather than just to the shareholders. And so if stakeholder theory is right, which I tend to think it is, then it's not just a problem of-- it's not just an annoyance when maybe your employees feel dehumanized. It's not just a risk that they'll be bad workers, but it's actually a moral failing on behalf of the company as well.

[00:19:21] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah, and so before we figure out whether or not this kind of account has some challenges and how you overcome those challenges because even that provocation, I think, is going to sit well with so many people and go, yeah, this really resonates with the feeling that they should be getting more and other people are going to go, well, business is going to business. Let's just update this for one second. So since you've written this article, it isn't just that AI is becoming more involved in the process in terms of screening. It certainly is, but we're also finding new uses of AI in the hiring process and here's one of them. So when you were writing the article, I think, you were talking about mostly sort of online video interviews. Now, some of that, rather than just being pre-recorded things that people have said, we're actually starting to-- it's the birth of the AI avatar. So we're starting to at least in some cases now seeing some companies experimenting with having human like, human looking, human sounding AI avatars, at least conducting some initial screening. What is the theory of dehumanization that you're talking about? Tell us about how we should look about this kind of a practice.

[00:20:35] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, chatbots and avatars seem-- I mean, so straightforwardly that seems to me like an attempt, maybe a good one, maybe not a good one, depending on how good the avatar is to humanize the dehumanization. I mean, we're sort of literally putting a mask on it. So, I mean, I guess there's a sense in which this might help, this might make some people feel less dehumanized in the process. Certainly, there is data that strongly indicates that humans are pretty good at feeling emotionally connected to AI, even when they know it's AI. I don't know if you guys talk about this in your class, but the rise of AI girlfriends and boyfriends is a real thing, and lots of data that says that basically if it doesn't, or if it passes the turing test, or even if it doesn't, sometimes we can get emotionally connected to it pretty quickly, so it might help. That might help people feel less dehumanized, but I don't-- to me, it almost feels worse because people might feel less dehumanized, but in fact, they are in a process that is just as dehumanized as it was before. I'm not sure that adding deception to it is actually a moral improvement. In fact, it feels morally worse to me.

[00:22:05] EVAN SELINGER:
OK, yeah, I have to admit you I'm just trying to get your point of view, I will add mine. I do agree with that. I think it is. OK, let's talk about two challenges and then maybe some things about future directions. So one of the things that comes out of this article is, you're not just making a strong claim about dehumanization. You're also obviously aware of all of the bias arguments and how at least in principle, we might imagine the use of AI to potentially make a process that is historically had many problems be a little less biased. So you point out there's a tension, possibly, that there are trade offs. How do we think about this in terms of balancing or whatever view? Because we want efficient hiring, we want fair hiring, and ideally, we don't want dehumanizing hiring. How do we think about all this?

[00:22:57] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, so there's certainly things that AI is better at than humans and the first example that comes to mind is driving. Driverless cars are so much safer than cars driven by humans. It's not even close, and that's because AI is just really good at following the rules and humans aren't. We get distracted, we get our emotions take over and we decide to do risky things. So in terms of keeping a cool head, not letting emotions take over, AI is better at that. Probably because it doesn't have emotions. I guess it depends on your theory of mind, but so AI is better at that and I think it's on that level that people see obviously less susceptibility to prejudice and bias. But there's a deeper kind of-- there's a deeper worry that I think should still give people a lot of pause when it comes to thinking of AI as this bias less kind of thing, which is that AI is-- the AI that we're working with now, even the most advanced versions of it, is and has to be trained on data already created by and gathered by humans. So basically, and we see this arising, another thing AI is used for is in prison sentencing. So AI is sometimes used for giving a calculation about how likely someone is to reoffend, and that goes into determining their prison sentence. Now, how do we make this AI? Well, we trained it on recidivism rates data on that that we have. But if law enforcement is and has been biased, especially racially prejudiced, for a very long time, then we can probably expect that the data we have on this, how often someone is likely or how likely someone is to be re-incarcerated probably has that bias and prejudice in inherent in the data. So when we go and we train our AI on incarceration data, we're training it on data that has this prejudice, this bias embedded in it inherently. So as long as I still requires being trained on this data that has been created by humans and gathered by humans, we can't really imagine-- we should expect that the AI will continue on our implicit biases and prejudices, just so far as it keeps showing up in the data, because that's the training the AI is getting.

[00:25:39] EVAN SELINGER:
So the last sort of challenge question, and this comes up all the time. So obviously you brought up stakeholder theory and your views that you said it's a view you believe in. The cynic is going to object and say back to your point about Kafka, business is going to business, and so these concerns about dehumanization, they're overblown. We really shouldn't be expecting companies to follow anything other than profit maximization. It would be lovely if they did, but in the real world that's often not the case. And so what would you say to someone who says, this concern is just kind of overblown once we accept what business is and does and moreover, people will adapt. You go on YouTube, you see people offering sort of training videos. Hey, here is how to perform for a camera instead of a person. Here's how to perform for an algorithm instead of a person. What do you say when someone just says, I guess this is just how it is?

[00:26:36] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, right. A lot of people probably think that this concern is childish or yeah, outdated. We should just embrace this brave new world of AI overlords or bosses. But I guess to me it's not really clear that-- or I guess to me it's clearly not the case that our job satisfaction and general life happiness has kind of gotten with the times in this sense. We still statistically greatly prefer work environments and do better in them where we feel seen and genuinely valued. So even if you have purely a shareholder theory of business obligations, you should probably still care about this. You probably have an interest in keeping employees and keeping employees that are motivated to work, that enjoy working for your company, and enjoy keeping their standing in your company good. Obviously, in recent years, there's been endless headlines about, oh, there's this employment crisis. People can't get people to work for them. They can't get people to show up for work and this affects the bottom line of businesses. So even if you have a purely shareholder theory or you're a super techno optimist or you think this is inevitable, we just need to suck it up, avoiding dehumanization as far as you're able to seems like a good business move purely in the business sense.

[00:28:06] EVAN SELINGER:
Let's just talk about that as our last thing. So going forward, students are going to be maybe coming up with their own companies. They're going to be applying to companies. Some of them may even want to work in this intersection between AI and employment. You've got new things going on. Any last thoughts here about either things students might want to think about going forward if they're both entering into this space, or they're going to be involved with creating software that puts other people in the space, or things that you're working on that build off of what you've done. Any thoughts going forward that are worth ending on?

[00:28:39] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, I think a couple main things. The first one is, I think, it's really important that people understand new AI. It seems like it's almost coming out faster than we can really grapple with it, but as far as one is able to I think it's important. And the main reason I think it's important is because I think that there is a lot of money being put into creating kind of a hype machine for it. People are very excited about AI, and a lot of times that's for good reason, but there's also financial incentives for the founders of these companies to make people think that it's more advanced, or more helpful, or more intelligent than it actually is. So really understanding how the AI works and what its limitations are, aside from the PR blurbs that it gets, I think is really important. And also just kind of taking time to sit. So if you're in a position where you are making decisions for a company about where to implement AI and the extent to which you should implement it, I think understanding, or at least forming your own ideas about what is valuable about the things you're considering using AI for, is going to be really important. There's all these debates right now about students using AI to write their papers or answer questions things like that. And I think a lot of times the debate ends up turning on different opinions on what the value of writing is. Why is writing valuable? Is it valuable just for kinds of extrinsic reasons, such that if we can get AI to do it more easily than we can do it, then maybe that's a good thing? Or is it valuable for intrinsic reasons, where we inherently wouldn't want to give up doing it ourselves because it's good for us in some way that we can't replace? So for anything that people consider introducing AI to, I think asking that question what makes this thing valuable for people is really, really, really crucial.

[00:30:53] EVAN SELINGER:
That's a great-- it's a great point to end on. Thank you so much for being able to do this today.

[00:30:57] MEGAN FRITTS:
Yeah, absolutely. Thank you for having me. I'm happy that people will be reading this paper, and if anyone ever wants to email me and ask questions about it, I would be happy to receive those emails.

[00:31:08] EVAN SELINGER:
Thanks again.
