[00:00:02] EVAN SELINGER:
So it is so great to talk with you today, Professor Hilke Schellman. You are probably the person I think has the most to say to students, and there's a lot of interesting things happening in this course, but you are able to. The last time I taught this course in person, you were able to talk with students and it was like a lightning rod catalyst. I think that reading your book, having a chance to talk with you. It was transformative.

[00:00:31] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
Thank you.

[00:00:33] EVAN SELINGER:
I'm just trying to give people a little slice of that today before I end up ultimately assigning some of your actual work. This is a good way to bring them in.

[00:00:42] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
 OK, hello everyone.

[00:00:44] EVAN SELINGER:
So your renowned book, which is what we're going to be focusing on, is the short title is The Algorithm, and then the long after the colon is How AI Decides Who Gets Hired, Monitored, Promoted and Fired and Why We Need to Fight Back Now. And so before we dive into that, I want people to get a little sense of who you are because these ideas don't come from nowhere. They're talking to a lot of strict academics in this course. They're going to be reading stuff by philosophers and lawyers and law professors and sociologists. You come from a completely different background. Although you are a professor, you started off in the world of investigative journalism. You won an Emmy for doing that. And now you're a professor at NYU. Given this whole background, what sparked the interest in AI and then ultimately led you to this specific topic where you're looking at the intersection between AI and what's happening in and around the workplace?

[00:01:39] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
Yeah, I asked myself that too. How did I get sucked into this rabbit hole for the last eight years or so? And why can I not stop? I'm working on another bunch of other AI accountability stories. But I think this was in 2017 the first signal of an idea that was implanted in my head came in November 2017, when I was in Washington, DC at a conference with consumer lawyers. Had nothing to do with AI. They probably still don't know what AI is. But I was there and I needed a ride to the train station to go back to New York City. I called myself a Lyft, got in the back seat and asked the driver how he's doing. And I take Lyft quite often. I don't have a car. I live in New York City. I have to travel a lot, and no one has ever said, I'm having a weird day. And I was like, Wow. I was like, OK. I was like, what's going on. And then he said, I just had a job interview with a robot. And I thought that was really weird too, because I've never heard that anyone had a job interview with the robot. So I ask a bunch of my question. And the guy, the driver was fairly kind and told me that, he had applied for a baggage handler position at Ronald Reagan Airport. And that day he just got a call from a "robot" asking him three questions. So knowing more about the world of AI and hiring now, it was probably like prerecorded audio interview. But to him it felt like a robot is on the other side. This is a robot interview interviewing me. I never heard of it, ask him if I can call him back. And he took down his number, put it in my notebook, and then forgot about it until a few months later. I was at the first FAccT Conference. It happened to be at NYU, otherwise I would have never gone, and a colleague of mine was speaking. She's like, you really have to come in there. There was afternoon meeting with Kelly Trindel, who had just left the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and she talked to like five people in the room. That she can't sleep at night because companies go through their employees calendars and check how many hours they are at work. And she's afraid that mothers and people who have disability would get fired. And we started talking about one way audio interview. She told me about a company and then I was off to the races. I hasn't stopped. I can't believe these stories eight years later. The idea is like, how do we quantify humans and human behavior? And what assumptions go in there and what results do we have? And what are the societal consequences-- it's not stopping. In fact, it's getting more and more right as we use more AI.

[00:04:23] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's talk about that foundation, because Yes, you start at the beginning and you walk us all the way through, and I hope we get to talk a few minutes about things that you've been thinking about since you've started this. So let's just start off at the beginning of the pipeline. And these are things students have probably had direct experience with. fight for jobs. They've tried to get interviews. So you talk about four core technologies that have AI infused in them. You talk about automated resume screeners. You talk about social media analysis, gamified skill assessment. And then, as you just mentioned here, some sort of a robot interview or an AI, even video interview. The companies, as you point out, they've got a very repetitive story to tell that these increased efficiency, they could reduce bias in hiring, they could cut costs. This is the rosy and glamorous. So let's just start off with what are these four things and how prevalent are they at this point.

[00:05:22] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
Yeah, it all got started, I think, a few years back as the origin story of AI in hiring technology is like in the early aughts when we had job platforms starting out, we had monster.com, Indeed, ZipRecruiter, and LinkedIn. They're all evolved over time. And it was the idea of democratizing hiring. You don't have to buy a Wall Street Journal anymore. Look at the job descriptions, which is an access. You had to write these elaborate letters, put them in the mail. I mean, it took forever to put a docket together for a job. But they made it easy. All the jobs would be in the same place. They had very basic algorithms find you other jobs. And over time it became almost like a one click application. And on the other side, this is great. Really great. Easy for job makers. Makes it convenient. But on the other side, it also made it now easy to apply on mass basically. So a lot of companies started complaining that they're drowning in resumes, drowning in applications. They have, the beginning we call this the hiring funnel. There's this big applicant pool. Hundreds of people, thousands of people like IBM said they get about five million job applications a year. It's just too much for humans. So they needed something. And then AI vendors or algorithmic it's also pre-AI just algorithmic vendors came on the stage and said, we have the best way to screen people. It's unbiased. We screen everyone the same way. It's not like humans who are hungry in the afternoon and they're going to see you differently. We're also going to find the most qualified people, and it's going to save you a lot of money in labor costs. Sounds all really great. So companies bought into this en masse, especially large companies that get this large volume of applications. So we have almost, I'm pretty sure right now it's like-- a few years it was 99% of fortune 500 companies use AI somewhere along in their hiring funnel. And if you apply today via job platform, be it LinkedIn, ZipRecruiter, or indeed I talked to all of them, they all use AI. And it's not necessarily bad, but what I've uncovered is that not all of these AI tools work as advertised. So I think that's what makes it problematic. Like I haven't actually found evidence that they found the most qualified candidates and I've found evidence of bias. It does make hiring more efficient for a lot of companies. That's why they like it. So I think the ideas, especially at the beginning, you get hundreds of resumes. How can I get this large applicant pool to a smaller pool that a human can deal with? Instead of like 10,000 people. How can I get to 50 of hopefully the most qualified people? So we call this AI screening. You have resume screeners that screen people out and then you often have some now you have gamified assessments that some companies use where you play a game that is supposed to reveal your personality. Then they often use one way video interviews or audio interviews where no one is on the other side. You just talk to yourself answering questions, pre-recorded questions. And then we also see social media analysis of what we call your data exhaust stuff that you leave around on the internet and that can be analyzed. And we also see AI then at the last stage of hiring the background check. We see that there as well.

[00:08:53] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's go through where these break down because you really detail each. And let's just start off with probably the most common experience people have, which is having their resume screened and as you say in the book and as you basically just mentioned here, the hope was people get tired, they get hungry, and they have all kinds of biases they bring to the table. Look for jobs. It should be relatively straightforward to automate. We're looking for someone with a certain background or a set of skills. People are looking at these themselves. Why can't we just automate this and do better? Why not?

[00:09:29] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
I mean, it should be fairly easy. We know the best way to hire is you look at people's experience, their competencies and skills, what you need for the role. Do they have Them and their capabilities. And that should be it, right. It shouldn't matter where you went to school, your address, all of those things. And so it should be pretty easy to automate this process. It turns out even like actually the basic steps of parsing the information from a resume into a spreadsheet is not without problems. This is actually even PAI. Like just the parsing of that information. When I talk to the CEO of ZipRecruiter, he said, look, it's about the parsers that we looked at were about 60% of the time successful. I mean, it's just such a low number. And it's like resumes are semi-structured. They're very similar but not the same. So it's not like there's always a skills section and a computer can take the skills section, put it into right field, no. Some people call it differently. So there's errors in that. And then what we see is if you just use the job description and train a tool like here's a job description, pick out the most important things that you need for the job and look for that in a resume. Some companies do use that. That is not super successful because job seekers are very smart. They also get that you should look at people's skills and capabilities and their experience and their line it up with the job description. Either it says you should be a team worker in this job description, they make sure it's on the resume. So you often have a lot of people who go on the, yes, pile and very few on the no pile. So it's not a good screen. So I think or not, it doesn't screen a lot of people out, so a weird step. But so then companies were like, let's use AI. Let's use the resumes of people who are currently in the job. I'm the head of quality control. I have these programmers here and tech people that do quality control. I have 50 of those. I need 10 more. Let's get the resumes of those 50 who are currently in the job, train the model with it because I'm assuming they're successful. Because we rejected all these other people. And they're the ones that went out. So something must be good about them. And let's see what they have in common. And then the tool does what it does. It does a statistical analysis and finds keywords that everyone has in common that makes them successful. Unfortunately, not only finds keywords that are skills-based, capabilities-based, it also finds keywords like Thomas, like first names or keywords like in another resume. Parser was like Syria and Canada like locations. And when I talk to lawyers about this, they were really worried because you can't discriminate based on national origin. That could be if you prefer people who have the word Syria and Canada on their resume, you might be discriminating against others who don't have those words. There was other tools used the words Africa and African-American and other tools gave people who had the word baseball on their resume more points in the word softball, fewer points, which could very well be gender discrimination. So the tool did probably what it does best is statistical analysis and found in the pile of resumes people who work at this company A in quality control, lots of them have baseball in common. Who knows? I don't maybe they went to the local school. I had a very good high school baseball team. Who knows? Somebody played on the baseball team, hired his buddies. It doesn't have anything to do with the job, but it is predictive because it has a statistical significance. But it doesn't have meaning. It actually doesn't tell you anything about the job. So now we see instead of human bias, like our grumbling stomach, stomach when we're hungry causes bias. Now we have machine bias coming in into these tools. So we see that in resume parsers and then in video interviews. At the time when I was doing my first reporting, HireVue that one of the dominant vendors in the space, they have the pre-recorded questions, you just record yourself looking at the little green lights they still had emotion recognition technology that checked, are you smiling? Are you growling? Frowning, all that kind of stuff. And compared it to other people who did the job interview. And I was pretty floored at that when I first saw it, I was like oh, I didn't know that. Our facial expressions and job interview were predictive of how successful I be. I'm a journalist, so I look for case studies. I look for real people doing this. And also we live with the motto, trust but verify. So I was like, so interesting. They gave me this whole spiel, how this emotion recognition works. And then I was like, OK, I'm going to go and verify this now. And then I talked to experts in emotion and emotion recognition. And they were like, what? Facial expressions for job interviews. There's no science. And I was like, wait, there's no science. Are you saying we don't know if facial expressions predict anything? And they're like, no we've never tested this and actually facial expressions in a job interview. I don't know if you smile when you talk about your strengths and weaknesses, how is that going to translate if you're going to be a good teacher or a good firefighter? I don't understand that. And I was like, yeah, I don't understand that either. So it's not meaningful. It's just the way that we can use technology. We can technically measure people's facial expressions and make assumptions about their underlying state of mind, but it's actually not meaningful. So that I found again--

[00:15:08] EVAN SELINGER:
Say a little bit more about that. Because this is something that once students read in your book, they really came around to but they had initial resistance to because I think a lot of them had internalized what feels like common sense for a lot of people, which is to say that well, OK, maybe these things aren't fully predictive, but someone who's telling the truth will look you in the eye. Someone who's got something to hide, and they're being shady in the interview, they're going to be evasive. Police, interrogators, there are so many ways that our faces are tell. Why is that not a scientific truth?

[00:15:45] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
Yeah. So I think what's interesting is all these theories that we have first six emotions that are common to every human. Basically we have same facial expressions. We have the same underlying emotions. It turns out like actually it's flawed science from like 50, 60 years ago. The way the methodology was they give people multiple choice answers and have somebody frowning. It was, first of all, what actors are doing it. So it wasn't actually people being angry. So you didn't even know that person was angry. Somebody was acting that out. And then you'd be like, is this person angry or happy? Well, it turns out most people did find the right answer. But now we have researchers who went with open ended questions. Just showed people photos and said, what does this person feel? who's doing this. Totally variety, totally dependent on different cultures. So it's not predictive at all. For probably most people in North America most of the time, if they're smiling, they might be happy underneath but a lot of times they're not. I've certainly been in job interviews where I've been smiling and it's zero. Was zero happy. Or for example, I had an editor who was like, when she got angry, she cried. So everyone always thought she was sad, but in reality, she was just mad. But that is how her body reacted to that. So it doesn't actually work for all of us. So that's really problematic. And then also the other question is, what does have emotions to do with the job anyways? Why do I have to match emotions with somebody else? Does that make me a better teacher or whatever you're trying out? No. We don't actually have any validity to that. I could see maybe an argument, if it's like facial expressions in the job. I think we would have to really critically assess that too. But a job interview is where we talk about the job, we're not doing the job. We can do a lot talking about a job that's not predictive about how we do the job. In fact, there's lots of people who are very good at talking about it, and lots of people who are then actually not good at executing the job. Also, you could imagine that some of the facial expressions are maybe gendered. I don't know, maybe women smile more. So if you have more women in the pool, then maybe people who are maybe more introverted or something, they smile less. They would get rejected because they didn't smile enough. Not because they're not qualified for the job. I get it's not about the things that you need to do, the capabilities and skills you need to have to be successful in the job. It starts being about facial expressions. Sometimes I push the argument and say if AI tool would analyze just people's images, they might find out that maybe brown hair is a predictor of success because statistically speaking, a lot people have brown hair, most of them blonde hair, the tool doesn't know that. So it might find those things, but obviously hair color has nothing to do with success in the job. Neither has baseball. As a human, at one point I said, well, I talked to an employment lawyer. I was like, maybe the tool found something that we didn't know for this particular job, whatever it was. Playing lacrosse in high school was predictive of success. And they're like, OK, but was it team sports? Why didn't they include baseball or football? or choir, maybe that's a team sport too. They're like, it's not, you're thinking like a human. You're injecting meaning. This is a statistical analysis. The word lacrosse came up many times and it counted it. And that made it predictive.

[00:19:28] EVAN SELINGER:
And so one of the last things just on this. So you've pulled out some of the civil rights implications because you're suggesting that without recognizing it because it's not parsing, meaning it's parsing patterns, certain protected information that should not be considered during an interview could be. But in addition to that, when it came to these facial interviews, you hearken this back to the discredited practice of phrenology. And you said that this old thing that most people would go, I can't even believe people ever believe this got new life because of the Gee-Whiz, cutting edge. So what was phrenology and how was this digital phrenology?

[00:20:13] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
I think phrenology and physiognomy and other things that go back a long time. And I think we still do that as human intuitively. I think that's why some of these AI tools, they intuitively make sense, but they're actually not scientific. Push into that, that we say, oh, he doesn't look like a criminal. I'm like, there's no criminal face. But the idea that innate characteristics of us, our personality is shown on the outside of our faces or our bodies. So we see with phrenology and other pseudoscience a couple hundred years ago that people would look at brain regions and be like, oh, if you have a big head here, that means you're this kind of thinker. Similar things like your internal capabilities, you can find them externally. And that is the same assumption here, that I have certain capabilities. And there I can find them on the faces of people in job interviews. So if somebody else is a team worker, whatever they have about them as a person is predictive of these key capabilities. And I just need to test job seekers for that. And the assumption is we could never do that. But the reality is we actually can't do it. It feels intuitively right. I think a lot of phrenology. There's Cesare Lombroso who was try to find the face of a criminal and laid over a lot of photos of criminals to find the criminal type. It's all bonkers. There is no criminal face. Although in popular culture intuitively, we believe that. So I think it harks back to that. And apparently we haven't been critical enough or haven't learned enough from history to actually see wait, isn't this repeating itself? Haven't we already done this? Is this actually working? I do have to say that eight years later after I started this research, we've become a lot more critical. Usually when I show people now the video with the facial expression, they're like, I have questions like, how can this work? Yada, yada, yada. And I was like, oh yeah, that wouldn't have been the case eight years ago. We've been like, oh, facial expressions. Yeah, who knew? We see this very differently now.

[00:22:36] EVAN SELINGER:
So before we get into the workplace, just two last things on that initial phase of the funnel. What goes wrong with about social media. I mean, we all believe having lost our privacy by giving social media companies so much. They know so much about us. So why didn't that turn out to be like the ideal thing for AI to mine for companies? And then you talk about AI games and on the surface that seems to also be a good thing. Hey, let me prove what I could do rather than talk about what I can do. So if there's a game that could allow me to demonstrate I really have these skills that I claim to have, where do these things break down? Yeah

[00:23:15] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
 I do think actually that there could be a market that we could actually find the most important skills and things that you need to do in a job and put them in a virtual reality testing and actually make people do the job and test them on the most important things on the job. But that's not what's happening here. You play games like pumping up balloons. So it's like a proxy for the actual thing. So this is supposedly finding out how much of a risk taker I am, pumping balloons. And when I collect the money, do I pump more often than somebody else? Then I'm a risk taker, even though the balloon pops at one point. And if I play it safe, I collect the money the assumption. The question is maybe I'm a maverick in video games. We talk about this all the time. People play shooter games and I don't think that makes them school shooters. We actually know it doesn't. There's a question like wait, is the behavior you show in games, are they actually a proxy for real-world behavior? That's sort of a question. Then also the other question is risk taking behavior does it actually matter in this job? Or did you just use this to play this game? I think the games really appealed to CEOs because they wanted agile employees, team players. And you can't beat that out of a resume. You can barely decipher hard skills. That's why you have hard skills assessments. Can you code? They give you a coding assessment. But team player in the history of us looking for team players, no one has said, I'm not a team player in a job interview. So how can you find that out of resume? But you might find it from these games. So I think there's a whole question about validity of these games. Do they actually pull out these capabilities that they say they do? That's the first question. Then the question is, are they predictive of the job? Or you are just checking for people risky behavior because the game does that? But is risk-taking actually part of the job? Because if it's not, why are you looking for this? Has nothing to do with the job. It's some random thing. And then you can also think about because again, it's the AI tool, the model is built with people who are currently in the job playing the games. I don't know, maybe all you accountants are risk-takers for whatever reason, but it has nothing to do with the job. Then you just only looking for the risk-takers and it has nothing to do if they can do the job. Don't you want people who can do the job? And then the other problem is with the games is that some of the things, I think, point to that it might not be viable for a lot of people with disabilities I think there's mental illness, things that might clash with some of the games, but there's also other things in one game, you had to hit the spacebar as fast as possible. I'm not sure what that-- this is called face validity, where people question themselves like, what does it have to do with the job? Why am I being asked to hit the spacebar as fast as possible? I asked myself that too. I was like, what kind of job are they testing me for? But the other question is well, when I played this with somebody who's quadriplegic. He was like, well, what is with people have a motor disability? What if they are totally capable? They're qualified. They could execute the job, but for some reason they can't hit the spacebar as fast as possible and they get rejected? Is that fair? And I think that is a really deep question that I really haven't had a good answer to. people with disabilities are already underrepresented in the workplace, then they're often not in the training data when we play the game, when we build the models, why not play the game. But you have people play the game, building the model. And then also disabilities often come out very individually. You might have one autistic person that behaves one way and then the next autistic person behaves totally differently. So I don't know how this very individual expression of disabilities could actually work in a large quantitative analysis, which AI algorithms are. And then the question about the social media pulling your personality out of your social media. Again, sounds very convincing, intuitively right. Feels like, well, what you write on your Twitter, of course you voted. I mean, it must be an expression of your personality. So when we tested that, I mean, the psychologist and I he did it. We both hit opposite personalities based on the algorithm, in our Twitter and our LinkedIn. And I was like, well, the theory is that you have a stable personality that doesn't change very fast. Otherwise, we wouldn't use that as a proxy. And then also we tested it with 100 students and it was all over the place. And it really doesn't work, at least in its current way.

[00:28:15] EVAN SELINGER:
It sounds like a parade of horrors as you describe it. And I think it's particularly interesting that you could still see some value. The one case that you just brought out was a potential use of VR, and I'm sure students who are thinking about potential futures, that might be something they would want to think about that you are talking about actually measuring real tasks that are really relevant. So this is all great. Let's move through the funnel now. So now you're at the job. AI is still being used. And you basically to reduce it to a couple of big uses. You talk about employees are being surveilled. You talk about some predictions about employees, like are they going to leave this job? And you talk about some decisions that are being made for these employees. Like do you deserve a raise or should you be fired? Walk us through these and what did you uncover as you began to see these very distinctive but sometimes, overlapping uses of AI in the workplace?

[00:29:16] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
Yeah, so we not only see AI used in hiring. I mean, we see it there, very prevalent, but we also see it in the workplace and more and more of that because in the United States, there isn't a whole lot of federal laws concerning workplace technology and surveillance. We don't have a lot of laws there. And also, case law actually favors the employer that everything that happens at a work computer belongs to the employer. So I think people assume there's some privacy, whatever they do in a work computer and that they go like online shopping and that really shouldn't interest their employer. But technically, there shouldn't be an assumption of privacy. So we see a lot of workplace surveillance as well. I mean, we also see like AI that is used in the workplace to predict what kind of skills, a large organization needs. Like today we have a lot of Python programmers. We need more machine learning people who can we upskill? Who is closest to this skill? They might forecast, OK, today we have so many truckers. We need this in the future. How do we get these people? How can we train them? How can we track them? I think that could be interesting use cases. It's also being used for career development. I might be a VP of product, I want to be a director or something. And a tool can tell you, hey, people at your company, they went from this level to this level, and here are the skills that you would need. Interesting, it's called career laddering showing you-- and you see that in LinkedIn already. Even for job seekers tells you a little bit oh, people have done that. People have done that. They've applied for this job. So you see a little bit of that. And then we also see it for just monitoring of people. And I think sometimes workers are aware of the monitoring and sometimes they're not. Sometimes it's like very overtly that. I talk to somebody, Emily Smith, who's a medical coder, and she knew basically from day one that she was monitored every second. And if she didn't read enough medical files in an hour, her boss would call. If she took longer than, I don't 10 or 15 minute break in the middle of the day, she immediately got the call. She was very worried at the end of the day, the company always put out a list of who were the top performing medical coders that day and who were the lowest performing. Once she's yeah, you never want it to be in the bottom. And I mean, she went so far with setting a timer to go to the bathroom and make herself something to eat because she needed to be back. Otherwise somebody would get mad. And she described it as really stressful. So she knew that was happening in other workplaces. I think people are not so aware of that that anything that happens on Zoom could be analyzed. We have software that checks are you a bully in meeting? Do you let people speak? The sentiment analysis companies. Sometimes it's called employee listening. Sounds like they're listening to their employees. They are, but they're basically monitoring everything that you write. So Slack is not private. They're sometimes Slack channels that all belong to the company. And if there's negative sentiments, it might be sent to HR, IT compliance. There's AI that can predict maybe your leaking company information because you're printing too much, you're moving too many files, there's all kinds of signals that are being used to help the company really in most cases.

[00:33:08] EVAN SELINGER:
So, I mean, to the extent that you feel like you're able to spot any patterns on this because this is something they kept coming up with the students, because we can talk about this in the abstract, or we can talk about how these technologies are used on the ground. So in the abstract, well, if a company is monitoring all the stuff that I'm doing, it could be privacy invasive in a way that's not great for me. But maybe they also are monitoring to figure out who's really doing the most work. So they could actually assign promotions based on real merit as opposed to optics. Oh, we have predictive maybe like you're saying, they could figure out we're going to have these needs and this person would be a good candidate if we upgrade them. But also we could use the same predictive technology to figure out, OK, this person's a flight risk. So there's really no need to reward them because they're not going to stick around. Overall, do you feel that these technologies tend to be used more to help workers or to help the companies?

[00:34:03] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
It's overwhelmingly unfortunate to help the companies. I wish there were algorithms that would help employees and say, hey, there's other people that do this, think about it like this. And it's usually used always in a punitive way. The other VP writes 500 emails. They close tickets in five minutes. Why are you not doing that? And it gets sent to your manager, and your manager might come down on you or not. And in some companies it's very clear, if I spoke to somebody who works at a large warehouse company who was like, yeah, if you fell under the productivity algorithm. So in so many times we had a script, we had to go to them and say like, hey, here's what you did. The next thing is like, either you bring your ratio up or your productivity up, or you will be reprimanded in this way. And it was all algorithmic driven, maybe on the very far side. But we see this in the workplace as well. This kind of tracking. And I think sometimes, we have people who are like the National Labor Relations Board a couple years out, put out a memo saying we're really worried that companies that just monitor everything workers do that they might actually find, union activity, which is illegal, you're allowed to talk to others, and maybe organize a union. And the company is not allowed to interfere in that they might actually get wind of this and then bring in union busters. And that could be potentially illegal and that would be not OK. You could also inadvertently reveal a disability by monitoring. Maybe you're writing someone, you need a break and because you need to take insulin, or if there are cameras everywhere and you would actually take insulin, you might inadvertently reveal that to an employer. There are all kinds of ways that this could be used. And, same with flight prediction. We use AI algorithms to predict if somebody's going to leave within the next 12 months or so. But we don't actually know that, but it has real consequences. If the tool says oh, look, is probably leaving, either you really like me and you want to keep me. And maybe you give me a bonus more than somebody else. Because technically, often money is limited and then somebody else doesn't get it. But you don't actually know if I'm leaving or not. And maybe you think. She can just take herself out. Great I don't have to worry about anything, but are you going to put me up for leadership training? Probably not. There are all kinds of consequences that come with this. Once you have that information, you can't unsee it. Even though you might tell a manager, hey, this is really just a prediction. We don't actually know if this employee is going to leave in the next 12 months. It's hard to not act on that, or at least have it in your heads and have it influence your decisions.

[00:36:54] EVAN SELINGER:
Let me ask you the hardest one. I mean, this is the thing that really gives people the biggest pause for thought. Are we really dealing with some situations where people are getting fired by an algorithm? And companies are going, but the algorithm is decided and thus it will be.

[00:37:12] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
I mean, we're seeing starting signals of that. We definitely see that some companies look at algorithmic data on their employees when they make often layoff decisions. We've also seen a lot of delivery drivers are the canaries in the coal mine for a lot of tracking and monitoring technology that we do see that, if they miss so and so many drop offs of packages, they get reprimanded. And sometimes they also got laid off or fired for that. Or often they're contractors. So you don't even get laid off or fired. You're just not working with that company anymore. And there's no appeals process. You don't know exactly why that happens. So we do see that. We see the beginnings of that. And I think firing and layoffs, you really need to make sure. And it really shouldn't be a prediction about something. And I think that worries me a lot that people might lose their job not because they weren't productive, but because of a faulty productivity algorithm or whatever you fell under and you have no idea how you're being tracked.

[00:38:25] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's bring this to a close on a more positive note, having gone through some of these--

[00:38:31] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
Yes, please.

[00:38:32] EVAN SELINGER:
So you want us to fight back and you've got some ideas. What could the average person do? What should policymakers do? And hey, if you're a technologist and you care about this, what can you do?

[00:38:43] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
 Yeah, I mean, I do think that this is the time because we are just at the beginning of this. I would call this the first generation of AI tools that we're building for work. And we see already how it's not working or how we used in hiring often really flawed processes that we used to do with our computers just by humans. And we just automated it into now flawed system. But we just broadened the scale so much that we might instead of harming 50 people a year by a human hiring manager, we now possibly could harm hundreds of thousands or millions of people. So I think that's really problematic. But now is the time to see hey, this and this and this and this doesn't work. And we should do it differently. If we use technology, and I think it is an interesting use case, at least in hiring because humans are so biased. Can we use some other technology and can we do it better? And can we actually do better in hiring? Because human interviews aren't very good. Your resume is very not predictive for your success in the job. Can we do other things? Can we actually have people do the job, test them doing the job? Can we use more holistic measures of assessments instead of playing games? And can we mandate that companies validate them? I was really surprised that unless you're overtly discriminate, you're pretty open what you use for hiring tools in this country and most in any country, there's no one. We just assume that companies would use tools that work. But actually that isn't so much the case. And since I started looking into it. So I think job seekers can do a lot, for themselves to make sure that they have machine readable resumes. I have a whole list of things that you can do with that. And then I think also trying to influence lawmakers and asking for more transparency. I think that's the first thing. And also getting companies to give you your data, I call people who have to use this technology for consumers. And because if you want the job, you of are forced to do this, can we get the data from the company to understand, what did they subject us to? And that would actually help us often understand what goes inside these algorithms. How are these predictions made? I also think that there should be laws and regulations that the AI vendors who build the tools need to know how the tools work. And we don't actually often see that because they use deep neural networks where you use training data to train the model. And then you check the results, but you never really understand what happens inside the black box. And I think that's where we have these misfires of using the word African-American or Thomas. And that didn't come from the vendors who built the tool that came from outside, people who were there to test the system. They found the problems that the companies themselves. So that all needs to change. But I think also we need to tell companies like, hey, you need to do better. So I think one thing I'm trying to do is maybe build out a more robust, not for profit arm and build some of these tools ourselves. The way that we can now build tools, it makes it easier for people. Can we build tools in the public interest that work? Can we put pressure on companies to do the right thing?

[00:42:19] EVAN SELINGER:
And maybe you anticipated the very last question I was going to ask you. But one of the tough things when anybody reads or watches anything is this is not the last thought that somebody had. You wrote a book, but there was a gap between when you submitted the manuscript and when it came out. And the book didn't just come out yesterday. You've been doing a lot of work. You have a Ted talk, but there's a gap between when that's recorded and what's-- so what have you been thinking about. Obviously, you just mentioned a potential non-profit since this book came out. But we're--

[00:42:46] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
Yeah, I mean what's striking, I think I had this talk with my publisher too, because they're really worried, like, Oh, once the book comes out, the technology is going to be outdated. And there's going to be five different technologies. It is striking how these predictive algorithms are so similar over the years. Actually, the technology really doesn't have changed much. I mean, there is a little bit of a sea change on the job seeker side with generative AI touch on this that you can now use like ChatGPT and LLMs to polish your resume, even generate your resume, generate cover letters. There's now AI tools that can apply for someone. So that has changed for job seekers. They feel, I think, a little bit less helpless. Although the volume of application has gone up even now more because it makes it even easier to apply. Easier than it was before. So now we really have hiring managers. We have this AI versus AI race now in full blown out there, and recruiters are even more frustrated and they want better technology. We really haven't seen that much new technology. We've only seen recruiters using GenAI to put resumes in there and asked ChatGPT to find the best candidate. I really caution against that because these tools are built to predict the best text. They're not built to analyze resumes. So I really hope people don't use that. And actually we found evidence of gender discrimination in these tools. So all kinds of biases could be built in. I think what has also changed is under the Biden administration, there was some appetite of reform and maybe changing the laws and pushing towards more AI ethics, obviously under the Trump administration, that is totally out the window. There's no appetite for regulation whatsoever. So I think that has really changed. We now see from people wanting to see change on the federal level, seeing some states pulling forward, some cities pulling forward to try to change this. But I also feel like we just have to tell companies to don't use this bad technology, build the right technology, build better technology, put pressure on the vendor, test these vendors, and because regulation alone is not going to solve this problem.

[00:45:06] EVAN SELINGER:
This is great, Hilke. Thank you so much. This was a real pleasure.

[00:45:10] HILKE SCHELLMANN:
 Anytime, it's always-- It's my pleasure. I've thought so long, and I was really worried when I was writing the book. I was like, is anyone going to care about hiring and the workplace and these AI tools? And I've been just blown away by how many people, I think have already felt the pain of some of these tools and are aware that this is happening and want to know more. And I think it's really important, like my job is to really show the effect and show the effect of humans of this technology what is happening inside the machine so that we can actually make better machines. When we know how they don't work. It's different than just like a theoretical problem of bias, which I think is important to have that conversation, but actually having evidence, OK, this is how it didn't work. So let's build better tools this way doesn't work. I hope is helpful to regulate this industry.
