[00:00:02] EVAN SELINGER:
So it's great to talk with you today, Professor Woody Hartzog. In this ethics of AI course that I'm teaching, students are going to be reading a bunch of articles, and one of them is going to be something that you and I have written with Judy Ree, normalizing facial recognition technology and the end of obscurity. I want to help them understand the main argument before they get at it, which is why you and I are talking now. And this argument is something that they're not going to be prepared for because it is a very, very strong argument. In fact, it's a hardcore indictment about facial recognition technology and the standard attempts to regulate it. So our convo today will explore some of the main insights that you and I try to provide in there and some of our key claims. But first, it's always important for me to let students know there are people behind these ideas. And so you're a professor, but not like me. You're a law professor, and you're at Boston University. You have a number of affiliations with many prestigious institutions. A lot of your work focuses on technology and privacy, and so just as a way into this just a little bit, what was your background? And what drew you to this very specific intersection of technology, privacy, and the law?

[00:01:16] WOODROW HARTZOG:
Oh, thanks for having me. It's a pleasure to be here, and it's a pleasure to talk about this work that we've been able to unpack. So I started thinking about this seriously at the dawn of social media, when my sister showed me, for the very first time, this new website called the Facebook that you had to be a student to join. And it occurred to me that this was going to change everything. And I had previously been interested in surveillance generally. I was in law school, literally in the law school on September the 11th. I was profoundly affected by what I consider to be unjust surveillance laws that was enacted. In the wake of that, I saw how governments started using surveillance, in my opinion, in unjust ways, to unfairly target marginalized and vulnerable communities of people with shared characteristics. And so I began to dig into the power of surveillance, how surveillance gives people all sorts of power over others, and that was one strand of my research. And then social media comes along, and social media starts kicking up all of these things that in life we had previously just allowed to fade into the ether. I began to reflect on how this whole new generation, including a lot of my friends, started posting every single aspect of their lives online and talking about who they're going out with and the things they did. No, they got so drunk last night. And I began to really meditate at that point on how in the past, there was an ability for people to fail safely and to experiment. And all of the things that we talk about, the virtues of privacy that was being I think, diminished thanks to information technologies and the incentives that those information technologies created. And so that was a combination that led me to want to write about privacy and information technologies professionally. And so when it became clear to me that I had a weird hobby, which was writing law review articles for fun. I was a practicing attorney at the time, thinking I was going to do information technology law. When it came time to really focus on the kind of scholar I wanted to be, I started to focus on the things that really matter to me, which is the ability for us as a people to have space to develop as humans, to engage in meaningful relationships, to share, to experiment, to play, and privacy struck me as critical to all of that. And that was what led me into studying privacy as obscurity and thinking about the role that information technologies played in making certain activities easier and harder, and how that affected our privacy. And I'll just end here, but I'm happy to go further if you're interested. When I first started writing privacy, and when you and I first met via Twitter, if I remember correctly, facial recognition was still the stuff of fantasy. It had existed for a while, but the idea that it would come into regular other use-- when we first started talking, it was still not a thing that we thought was on the horizon. But turned out we were very wrong about that and it was only just a few years away.

[00:05:05] EVAN SELINGER:
For sure, and that's what I want us to dig into. Things change rapidly. They changed in ways that were, I would say, ahead of any timeline we would have expected. As one last kind of prelude, because, of course, students who are going to be unpacking what we're arguing, they're going to see that we're coming at this from an interdisciplinary point of view. You're bringing all the tools, all the skills of being a law professor. I bring some stuff from philosophy to the table. Just really quickly so people can get a sense, what's the value of doing this in an interdisciplinary way? I mean, people could, of course, chop this out however they want, but you and I are constantly combining law and philosophy. What does that give us? What do you think?

[00:05:47] WOODROW HARTZOG:
Oh, that's a-- what's the magic to the salt and pepper, or the-- I'm trying to think of the killer combo bread and cheese to make pizza. And so one of the things that I think has been so fruitful about our interdisciplinary collaboration is that we have been willing to embrace the other's viewpoints and methodologies that we bring to this. And so philosophy I so appreciate when you and I start to tackle a problem, the structured way in which you will help us walk through our interrogation of a problem. And understand it from multiple different perspectives. To think about it from a moral lens in a way that the law is so deeply moral, but ways that we don't often talk about. And that I myself didn't even understand until you forced me through philosophical inquiry and to really make explicit in a way that I don't think I would have earlier. And so I think your background is able to help us bring theory. I think it is able to help us highlight and understand the important issues to make them tractable as values that we discuss and try to solve in human problems. And so I guess your background in philosophy generally helps us tee up the problems, and think about ways of understanding it. And then maybe what I like to think that the law does. One of the critiques of other methodologies is that they're allergic to line drawing. Is that the law is very comfortable drawing lines, and that's what we do. So we can debate philosophically about the virtues of x, y, or z, and then at the end of the day, someone's got to win and someone's got to lose. And how do we draw that line? And what's the method by which we go about making that distinction? And so I think you and I have been able to combine, if you'll allow me, a little bit of hubris to meaningful effect, a way of teeing up problems. And then not just letting them sit and say, what do you think about that? But then really sort of meaningfully go about drawing lines that help us solve these, I think, great human problems of our time, not to put too fine a point on it.

[00:08:23] EVAN SELINGER:
And speaking of great human problems, let's get into the core idea. Because although this paper seems to be about facial recognition technology, the main character, if you will, the thing that we argue needs to be preserved is this idea called obscurity. Now, this isn't going to be something most people probably heard about because they're going to be thinking in terms of privacy. So let's just start with a little foundation to bring people up to speed. What is obscurity? Why are we talking about obscurity and not privacy?

[00:08:53] WOODROW HARTZOG:
Yeah, so can I begin with a little story? I feel like the way I understand this is a little story. So when I first started-- one of the first things I realized when I started researching privacy is that we all have a slightly different conceptualization of it when we talk about it, and that it has no actual set meaning. And there's of course volumes of scholarship about that and all sorts of different literatures. But one day, my son, when he was four years old. And I was still early in my career, comes up to me and he goes, dad, what's privacy? And I was so proud. And I said, this is my moment where I get to explain my lifework to my son. And, and I said, son, privacy is a contested concept with variable meanings. And he sort of tilted his head, and he looked at me. And I was like, well, son, sometimes privacy can be normative, but it also has descriptive components. And he sort of looked at me, and I thought for a second, and I said, son, privacy is when you close the door when you go to the bathroom, and he got it. He was like, now I understand. But I felt so unsatisfied after that conversation because what I realized I had done is that I had actually sort of entrenched the most intuitive understanding of privacy, which almost all of us have, which is privacy is secrecy. It is that which we completely shield from the world. It is my own thing versus the other thing. And most of my research has actually been, and you and I together have unpacked through a number of academic works and public works, have pushed back on this idea that privacy is only about secret things. Actually, most of what I would consider to be private. And actually, I think in our everyday lives, the most common kind of privacy is privacy is obscurity. And what I mean by that, and what we mean by that when we unpack it in the article, is that there are certain things in life that are unlikely to be found or understood by most people, or virtually anyone, even though we expose them to everyone. So think about have you ever walked past the window, or gone out to get the newspaper really quickly in your pajamas, or taken-- I guess that nobody gets the newspaper anymore, but you've taken the garbage out in your pajamas. What are the odds that someone was going to see you in your pajamas? But what if the Google car came by and took a photo of you? Now you're in your pajamas on the internet forever. We had been existing-- we live our lives in these zones of obscurity where our risk calculus is based around this idea that people probably aren't going to see you. So think about the time you went to a restaurant and you gossiped about your coworkers. You probably weren't assuming that was being recorded, and it would get played back in front of the coworkers that you were gossiping about. Because we live our lives in these zones of obscurity. You buy hemorrhoid cream at the drugstore, and you aren't really worried that someone's looking over your shoulder even though it's in public, because we live our lives in zones of obscurity. And we haven't-- one of the reasons that we theorized that this is a relatively unintuitive concept is because for most of our lives, the default has actually been obscurity. It's the thing that we are awash in, and we haven't even really had to think about it because it was our natural state. And that changes with the introduction of information technologies that make the collection and discovery and sharing of our information significantly easier. And when things become easier, more people do it and it changes or it conflicts with that sort of mental model that we have, like our threat model about who's likely going to see us. And so one of the things that you and I have unpacked in a lot of this work that we've been working on now, I guess, we're almost a decade into the obscurity project, is this notion that this is something worth preserving. Because it really is what protects our day to day interactions, and it's what gives us that feeling of safety that we can be a little reckless and a little carefree than we would be-- more than we would be if a camera were pointing directly in our face and broadcast in Times Square. And the humans just aren't built for that sort of exposure. Constant, always on exposure. And so obscurity is that freedom based on probability that no one's going to see. It is a sort of relatively simple way of explaining it I hope that's one good way of thinking about it that I've done.

[00:13:55] EVAN SELINGER:
That's great. I'll pull out one other little idea here, and I think this will really bring it home. So we talk about how hard or difficult it is to find information and to understand that information. And we've used vocabulary that some people call transaction costs. And I think it would be helpful to explain how obscurity hinges on transaction costs, and maybe to just make this as concrete as possible, to explain this by thinking of two different kinds of an example. One, you mentioned being in a restaurant. So if we want to gossip about our coworkers and protect our obscurity, what are the things that people would do to increase the transaction costs and increase their obscurity? Or on the flip side, imagine you're walking through a park, and suddenly there are cameras. But these cameras have facial recognition and lip reading technology. How would that diminish our obscurity by diminishing transaction costs?

[00:14:52] WOODROW HARTZOG:
Yes, that's such a good-- so the transaction cost component is really key to understanding obscurity, because our risk model is based upon a certain assumption about how difficult or costly, we'll use the term cost, it is to transact. And so the higher the cost, the less likely someone is to do it, the safer we feel doing it. So, for example, we don't assume that most people are walking behind us, tracking us everywhere we go because the cost of doing so would be quite high. So could you imagine if I wanted to tail you. In the old days, in a pre information technology day, I would have to hire a private investigator to follow you everywhere you went and they get paid by the hour. And that's just one person. It's even more illogical to think that they're all being followed by a private investigator everywhere we go, all the time. It's expensive to do so. The transaction cost is very high. Another great example would be when we talk about what all of our hobbies are, or where we win, or did with our friends. So in order to overhear that would have to be physically present to do that, or it would be the kind of thing that we would write it down, but it would be in one particular place and you'd have to go looking for it, which would require the expenditure of time and effort. And so that time and effort and sometimes money, costs can be also financial cost, gets paid. And as technology makes that easier, the more likely it is to happen and the more exposure we have. The less we can rely upon that cost, that high cost that we know most people probably won't pay. So when our phones get outfitted with GPS devices, or when lip reading technology makes translating what we say much more accurately into actual text, text that it can then be easily stored, shared, and preserved, and replicated and aggregated, then it makes it more likely to do, because people are particularly industry and governments are hungry for that personal information. They're going to pay that reduced cost to do it. And the very first article that you and I wrote on obscurity had to do when Facebook first introduced the news feed. And if you'll allow me just to talk a little bit about how that's a really great example of obscurity. So many people were not on Facebook in the early days before the introduction of the newsfeed, but it used to be just all profiles. And so I would have a profile and you had a profile, and you would log on to Facebook. And you wouldn't be confronted with the feed, you would be given a search box. And they said, who do you want to go check out? You would have to expend a certain amount of effort, labor, time, and be like, I think I want to see what Evan is up to. And so then I would type in your name and I would look at your profile, and I'd have to remember whether it changed any from the last time, and all of these things would be costs that I had to pay. And then all of a sudden, Facebook takes everyone's changes, every single time anyone made any change, and aggregates it into one feed. It reduces the cost of finding every single change that every single one of your Facebook friends made since the last time you logged on and made it into an easy, scrollable thing, where you barely have to pay any transaction costs at all, other than logging into Facebook and doing the little scroll function. And so by reducing the transaction cost of finding and understanding all of those updates and all those changes, it eroded our obscurity because it made that more likely to be found.

[00:19:01] EVAN SELINGER:
So if you and I are at a restaurant and we're in your City of Boston, which is a big city. And we're out to dinner, and we're gossiping about our colleagues, first of all, most people there don't know who we are, so we're kind of obscure. We're all heroes of our own story, but we're not the object of attention for most people. And if we were concerned, we could do things like modulate our voice. We could speak in hushed tones.

[00:19:23] WOODROW HARTZOG:
Yes.

[00:19:24] EVAN SELINGER:
But if we were walking through a park and there was a camera, and the camera had facial recognition and it could identify us, and it had lip reading. We would lose something that you and I would have at a restaurant, which is people don't think about privacy in public. But the way we've described this, you can have obscurity in public if those transaction costs are high enough to deter most people. And that's why you and I have argued, and I think this is a kind of last big thing to get out the main idea. We've talked about obscurity as not just something convenient to have. Something that we can take for granted. Something that is so important. It's actually central to many of the top things within Western culture. We've said it's essential for democracy. We've said it's essential for individual development, and we've said it's essential for collective well-being. Why is obscurity necessary for all of these goods? And where if obscurity gets threatened, so too, we've argued, do these goods.

[00:20:30] WOODROW HARTZOG:
So obscurity is that which protects us from abuses of power. So there I'll go back to the story about telling my son that privacy is when you close the door when you go to the bathroom. It also is about power and how information gives power to people, and when you are exposed, you become vulnerable to the party that has all of that power. And so one of the reasons that obscurity is so important is that it preserves that space for us to engage in a behavior, what some scholars like Erving Goffman would call backstage behavior. We just need to relax. We need a space where we don't have to be on all the time. So right now, I know that I am being recorded and that this is going to play back later, and so I've got a certain risk model in my mind of things not to say like, don't-- forgive me, but don't like burp aloud or something like that. There are all these sort of things that you want to avoid because you think that information will come back to haunt you later. And so when you lose obscurity, you are forced to a, always be on high alert, which results in chilling effects. We pull back our behavior, meaningful interactions that are necessary. We become less intimate with each other. We disclose less, which is key to developing important relationships. We lose the ability to engage in day-to-day movements that, if shrouded in obscurity, wouldn't reveal anything. But if we're over surveillance, and I think about a surveillance generally is a loss of obscurity, then who my doctor is revealed because I get tracked going to my doctor's office. What my medical ailments are are revealed because I get tracked making purchases. And so not only is it a tool for the powerful, and I think that we should always go back to the harms of surveillance and loss of privacy and thinking about what the harms of loss of obscurity are. It also denies us the ability to just engage in a little bit of meaningful, kind of messy social interaction. So I worry about big things. I worry about the easy ability of governments to flip a switch and track us when we protest in public, so it affects our free expression rights. But I also worry about little things. I worry about how when we are no longer obscure, even the slightest slip up, we go jaywalking. We have a bad day, and we accidentally get hot with someone else and say something that we kind of regret in the moment and realize it was a little unkind. And so then that creates a digital record that then gets used against us all the time. And so we're just as humans, not built for that sort of threat modeling. And we need this sort of space that obscurity provides in order to engage in meaningful life activities and to get a meaningful refuge from power. Particularly marginalized communities and vulnerable communities, which are going to feel the brunt of surveillance first and hardest. And so I think that it's important to understand that when we talk about loss of obscurity and the harms, those losses and those harms are not evenly distributed in society, and that some feel it more significantly than others.

[00:24:39] EVAN SELINGER:
 Yeah, so before we get into those harms, which is so key, what you just outlined is so important. So obscurity is essential for core political activities. Because if we're constantly afraid of exercises of power, we're going to be afraid to do things like go to lawful protests. If we're afraid to speak our minds, you and I are back at that restaurant. It's going to be harder for you and I collectively, to form intimate social relationships. And if we're afraid that things are going to be on a permanent record that can be weaponized against us, individual development becomes hard because you're afraid to ever speak your mind and try out new things. And this starts bringing us now to the article, because we talk about how artificial intelligence is changing the calculus for obscurity in ways that should be concerning. We give this example. We talk about how AI is becoming easily democratized. We talk about this thing called I X-ray. It was an example of a democratized facial recognition system. What was that and why does that kind of crystallize where we're at?

[00:25:43] WOODROW HARTZOG:
 Yeah, so I think that when we think about AI's ability to completely eviscerate obscurity, the I X-ray experiment that was done by two students at Harvard is the perfect example of how things can-- how a dramatic shift in transaction costs can significantly lower our obscurity very quickly. And so what these two students did-- these were researchers from Harvard that took, I believe, one of the meta, Ray-Ban augmented reality glasses and implemented a little bit of off the shelf facial recognition technology into the sunglasses, such that these researchers were able to put on the glasses, walk up to anyone in public, run a quick facial recognition search on them, and then get an overlay of the Google search results of whatever comes up when it matches with their face. And so what happened is these students were able to walk up-- and an example would be I would walk up to you and say, oh, excuse me, excuse me. Are you Evan Selinger? Professor Evan Selinger? And you might think, oh, wow. Someone recognizes me. I knew I was that famous. My work is that good. And then they would be able to ask questions of you like, oh, how's Rochester? Do you enjoy it? And start picking out all these questions. And then if they dug a little deeper into your internet profile, then they could get some really intimate information about you, which leaves us vulnerable to manipulation, to fraud, and all sorts of problems. And so the end result of this experiment was to demonstrate that it would only take a trivial lurch in technological advancements, and a single decision by one company for a popular enough technology, if it ever caught on, to essentially end the ability to ever remain obscure in public. And that has all sorts of shocking implications about how facial recognition, if we are not careful, if our rules do not respond to this threat, could result in the end of most forms of meaningful obscurity that we have in our public lives.

[00:28:27] EVAN SELINGER:
And that type of a concern leads you and I to make a claim that many are going to find startling. Many people tend to think of technology as neutral. They think it could be used in good ways. They think it could be used in bad ways. And in the end, it all comes down to how it's used. But we actually characterize the technology itself. We call it a few things. We call it a morally suspect tool. We also call it a perfect tool for oppression. Some people go, well, there are plenty of ways that you could reduce privacy or obscurity. We've had fingerprinting. Now we've got automated license plate readers. Why do we single out this technology with these very strong labels? Morally suspect, perfect tool of oppression.

[00:29:13] WOODROW HARTZOG:
So I think that it's important to make the claim to understand that-- to underscore, excuse me, that there really is no such thing as a neutral technology. I wrote a book a few years ago called Privacy's Blueprint: The Battle to Control The Design of New Technologies, where I made this claim. And the idea is when you and I give talks about facial recognition technology, people say it's just like a knife. Knives can be used to cut vegetables. They can be used to hurt people. You wouldn't make a rule around prohibiting knives, would you. You don't want to deny the benefits. And while I think that it's true that, of course, there are some technologies that provide enough benefits that we want to encourage all that it brings and just mitigate the harmful uses. Facial recognition is the most uniquely dangerous surveillance tool ever created. And the reason why I say that has to do with the fact that it focuses specifically on our faces. So our faces are unique in three ways that are so dangerous that it makes facial recognition technology worthy of singling out, even among biometric related rules. And so I'm a law professor. I literally just got done teaching my class on biometric law. There are laws all over the United States that regulate the use of biometrics, and it clumps them all together. It clumps gait recognition and fingerprints and IRAs recognition and voiceprints. And there are all of these different ones, all of which I think are of varying degrees, risky. But nothing is as dangerous as your face, for three reasons. One, your face has a legacy of being everywhere, because AI and facial recognition is a turnkey technology. It's an add on. It's like you can put it in the expansion pack. You're going to boot up Microsoft Office one day, and voila, you've got all sorts of AI sort of jammed into it, or the ring software just needs a simple software update. And then next thing you know, you're rocking and rolling with facial recognition technology. And so the reason that faces are so dangerous is that we've been taking pictures and creating databases of our faces for as long as the technology has been available for us to do that, so for almost 100 years. And so there's this legacy of information out there, databases out there just waiting to be exploited. That's not true with our voices necessarily, and it's certainly not true with our fingerprints, or our iris, or our gait, or our heartbeat, which is apparently a biometric that I didn't realize until not too long ago. But faces are just there, waiting, ripe to be exploited, and we've seen that already. Clearview AI is the perfect example of a company that was more than happy to exploit the fact that every single one of us has a social media profile with our face right there attached to our name. So all you have to do is, of course, scrape that information, put it in a database, and now we're universally recognizable. You can match our name to our face everywhere we go. Two, faces are harder to hide. So there are important reasons to think that in current political climates that there are-- it's difficult to hide your face. Not only is it more difficult. It potentially inhibits all sorts of possible speaking or recognition in certain environments. Sometimes there are actually rules against it, and so faces are unique in the sense that they've been targeted in other areas that might inhibit countermeasures. The third reason, and I think maybe the most important reason that faces are exceptional, is that they are at the very core of our identity and our external facing presence. And so if I did even remotely good job in this discussion, you might remember it sometime later. And you say, I remember Professor Hartzog saying that thing about facial recognition. And when you recall that in your mind, you're not going to think about my elbow or my pinky, you're going to think about my face. It is the core identifying feature culturally and socially that gives us all sorts of-- it kicks off all sorts of interactions, both technologically and just in our daily lives. And so the fact that we would be so cavalier as to say that our faces are ripe for scraping strikes me as absurd given how central the face is in our daily lives. This is if we're going to build privacy laws around dignitary concerns or risk assessments, then the face strikes me as central. And so for those three reasons, faces-- oh, and the fourth reason is that your face acts as a beacon, and so your face goes everywhere you go. And so unlike your fingerprint, which is difficult to assess at a distance, it's relatively easy to assess your face at a distance, and so it's easy to track you places that you go. So for all those reasons, faces are, I think, worthy of exceptional treatments, and that's what helps contribute to facial recognition as being the most dangerous surveillance tool ever created.

[00:35:09] EVAN SELINGER:
 For sure, and then we even add it becomes something to build on. You could have what's called facial characterization. And we talk about in the article How you could use junk science assumptions about what a face is indicating, and what it's conveying, and that's easily an add on to that too. And this brings us to the important thing of normalization, so we're going to shift to that. So we've made the case. Obscurity is so important not just for you or for me, but for a whole way of life. For personal growth, for collective flourishing, for democracy. It would seem to be the kind of thing we would want to preserve, and yet you and I notice it is continually being eroded. And so one of the ways we start trying to figure out why would we be giving up something that we should be treasuring has to do with normalization, so let's talk about this. We talk about a number of different features of what's called normalization. And normalization is a word. It's defined in different disciplines in different ways, and we try to cash out a number of its core features. Two of the top features we talk about is a way of getting into this sort of psychological or cognitive science features. One feature is what we call unexceptional habituation. Another is something we call favorably disposed normalization. What are these, and how are they chipping away?

[00:36:33] WOODROW HARTZOG:
Sure. So unexceptional habituation is actually what it sounds like, which is when you become so accustomed to encountering something. Something, or concept, or phenomenon, or practice that it is so commonly encountered that it's no longer worth commenting on. In other words, it is not exceptional anymore. It just blends into the background of daily life. And so a really great example of that would be CCTV cameras, which once were things that I know I personally would notice and I would say, oh, there's a camera. They are staring at us. And now I was recently in London. It just blends into the background. We've encountered so many CCTV cameras that it just feels like a normal part of everyday life, and we're on that road as well with ring cameras. The ring doorbell cameras. When I first started encountering them, I was like oh, OK, I guess we're putting cameras on doorbells now. And I've encountered enough that I don't even say anything anymore when I go to someone's house and I see that they have a ring doorbell camera. And that has very important consequences that you and I unpack in the surveillance normalization cycle that we build out in this article and others. And that leads to that second psychological phenomenon known as favorably disposed normalization. And favorably disposed normalization is this dynamic that if you are looking for whether something is right or wrong. So often our brains are looking to see is this a good thing or a bad thing? One of the most popular and consistent things that we look to in order to make that decision is actually the behavior of other people. We take our moral cues from others. And so if lots of people are doing a thing, then maybe we sort of ration through. We say, oh, well, it must be a good thing if other people are doing it because surely that many people wouldn't be doing a bad thing. And so the way that unexceptional habituation then feeds favorably disposed normalization is when people stop commenting on it anymore. We observe that. That is reflected back on us and we say, well, nobody's talking about facial recognition anymore. We're all just sort of standing in line at the airport while our face gets scanned and we board the plane. We then start to take these moral cues where over time, we come to believe it as normatively OK, if not desirable because of the efficiencies about it. And so the other part that we unpack, and I think it's in this piece, if not, it's in some of our earlier work and earlier work with Judy, is the idea that this also gives us-- it plays upon our need not to see ourselves as the bad guy, which nobody likes to see themselves as being complicit in morally dubious technology. And so if everybody else is doing it, then maybe we can that gives us a edge between when in order to avoid cognitive dissonance, where our brain sort of disagrees with itself. We look at that and we say, oh, well, this allows me to also be OK in participating in this, so I think it's OK thus further perpetuating the unexceptional nature of it and maybe even the normatively desirable nature of it.

[00:40:08] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah, and so as you point out, we've got these sort of psychological components, and that feeds into other things that expand and deepen the cycle. You already just pointed out this idea that you're waiting on line at the airport. It's a pain in the neck if you're going to opt out of facial recognition. It's a lot more convenient. In fact, we end up seeing the benefits first of these tools in a much more salient way than they're harm. So that also, we argue, furthers the norm. It's much easier to understand it. Getting through a line quicker feels a lot better than being pulled out, having to explain yourself, maybe not being able. So another way normalization works is the benefits, they're highlighted. They jump out. But then we also talk about there are other features that ratchet up this normalization and pull us away from wanting to preserve obscurity. In fact, you've talked a lot about how the law does a few things before we even get into complicated legal things. Let's just start with some basic legal things that further entrench normalization. In the United States, giving consent is so crucial. And consent seems great because it seems like you are approving of this thing, and if you didn't approve, you wouldn't do it. But you argue consent actually furthers normalization. Same thing with opting out. Opting out seems like an extension of that freedom, but how does giving someone the ability to so-called consent and so-called opt out further entrench normalization rather than truly enhance our freedom?

[00:41:42] WOODROW HARTZOG:
So this is such a good point, because it plays into a lot of the other debates that we're having around privacy and the right way to regulate it. And so I've argued for years that consent is a broken regulatory mechanism for privacy for all sorts of reasons. It's illusory. It's not real control over anything. It's not like you can demand, I only want to be tracked under certain circumstances, and you can only use facial recognition if it makes me look beautiful, or if it's for a happy search. If we had that sort of magic wand power, then maybe that would be meaningful control. But it's not. It's illusory. It's overwhelming. We get asked so many times how many of you just sort of roll your eyes at the cookie banners? The ubiquitous cookie banners that we all have to click, I agree to as quick as possible. Or anytime the Apple's iOS system updates and you click I agree, I agree, I agree, and we don't even read it. So it's not meaningful consent in any way because it's so overwhelming. It's not knowledgeable. It's not really voluntarily given because we got to give it. It's conditioned upon the use of all sorts of services, and then it's also the wrong goal in the long run. But what consent and opt out then does because it is kind of preordained and easily manufactured by companies that it gives this sort of legitimacy, unearned legitimacy to other people's uses of all these tools. So our opt in is a Fait accompli. It is preordained that we will opt in. It is preordained that we will say yes, or that most of us will say yes over time. And just like the holdouts from the smartphone, eventually we're all going to get on board. And so what it does like consent by unpacking all of that, it really almost is a way for the law to guarantee that we are going to agree with the use of facial recognition technology.

[00:43:56] EVAN SELINGER:
So the law sort of helps shape our attitudes. It helps manufacture a certain approach to consent. This furthers normalization. And this leads us to argue that all of these processes together, when we start off with things we no longer pay attention to, things we see other people doing so we assume a certain amount of goodness in them. We end up having opportunities to opt out that are not real opportunities. We have opportunities to say no, that are not real opportunities. And so we argue that all of these features, all of these components of normalization, they lead to something really horrible. They lead to a trajectory that we call a slippery slope. And people are a little afraid normally of talking of slippery slopes, but we lean into it and we say that a slippery slope gets created that has something especially bad at the end, which is this. It impacts people's attitudes of what is considered reasonable. What we ought to reasonably expect, and this is as much of a cultural attitude as an idea that has legal consequences. So just talk us through real quickly. How does the constellation of all of these features of normalization fuel a slippery slope? And how does that slope shape this attitude of what we should reasonably expect regarding the obscurity that's available to us?

[00:45:25] WOODROW HARTZOG:
So the way that this all comes to a head really is this notion of what a reasonable expectation of privacy is. So the law many, many years ago made the decision that the threshold for determining a legal privacy violation in many instances. Not always, but in the really big important ones would be whether someone's reasonable expectations of privacy has been violated, which sounds in one sense like a very good thing to do. It is a flexible standard. It looks towards what is sort of prevalent norms are in the community. It's a way in which it can be updated over time so it doesn't get outdated very quickly. So all of that is very good and helpful, but the problem that you and I tried to surface is that privacy-- that our notions of privacy and obscurity gets diminished, not in one great swoop, such that it would trigger a shock. That violates everyone's reasonable expectations of privacy. There are certain things that we all-- a peeping Tom, for example, is the paradigmatic example of someone that violates a reasonable expectation of privacy because people should reasonably expect privacy when they're in the nude changing in their bedroom. And that's an easy one, but that's not the way in which our obscurity gets diminished. It gets diminished a little bit at a time in what we have-- it's a de minimis privacy harm or what you and I with Joanna Gunawan call privacy nicks. These small, little dimensions that happen just a little bit at a time. And that creates a problem because the law generally ignores de minimis injuries. It says, oh, that's just a trifling injury, which for many reasons that's a good thing. We wouldn't want someone to be able to go to court and say, oh, you hurt my feelings. Give me $1 million. That's also a version of a de minimis harm. But it's insidious when it comes to surveillance, because all of these privacy nicks always guarantee that there really will not be any sort of meaningful pushback in the interim, while people's attitudes change. So in other words, we see the Amazon ring doorbell, and we say, oh, it's creepy. I'm being watched. But it doesn't rise to the level of a privacy violation, because the law says, well, only a reasonable expectation of privacy triggers a privacy violation. And you have no reasonable expectation of privacy because it's just creepy. That's not a highly offensive and sort of violation. And so we then go on, and we become accustomed to things. And then the next time that comes up and someone raises a challenge, we're even further from that goal than we were when we started, because people are now used to the doorbell cameras and so it becomes almost axiomatic. It's like, of course, everybody knows that there are Amazon ring doorbell cameras everywhere, and so that's a problem. So there's never exactly one moment, never one meaningful push that allows us to democratically come together and draw the line and say, this is where we want surveillance to stop for the good of society. Instead, what happens is that it gets to be a finish line of a race that is perpetually redrawn again and again. Just when we come up to it, we move it back just a little further, and just when we approach it, we move it back a little further. And the end result of that, and this is why we argue that it's the end of obscurity, is that the law is arranged as such that it will allow anything people can be conditioned to tolerate. We are on track, without a better substantive backstop, to be conditioned to tolerate everything. There literally is sort of no substantive backstop in the law, most privacy laws, that would say this is when we've had enough. Instead, we just ask each other, we ask ourselves, have we had enough? And the answer is always going to be, well, I feel weird about it, but let's keep going in perpetuity.

[00:50:14] EVAN SELINGER:
So we'll stick the landing in just a moment, talk a few more things about how the law further actually works to end obscurity rather than preserve it, but I've got one last normalization question. Now, we don't actually say this in the article, but the article very much implies this, and I think it would be super helpful for you and I to just pull this last point out about normalization. Then we can quickly talk about why the law isn't doing what we would hope it would do, and why we're pushing for something so extreme as a ban. But to put this whole thing on normalization in a nice, pretty bow or a nice ugly package. Our analysis actually suggests something fascinating, I think. We're suggesting what we should call a normalization paradox is taking place. Because as we talk about all of these features, we're saying two things. This goes back to your earlier point about thinking about different communities being impacted in different ways. Some people are going to be experiencing normalization in a slightly more frightening, chilling way, while others pay no attention to it at all. One person's luxury surveillance is another person's Amazon ring, which makes them afraid to walk in a certain neighborhood. How is normalization having this almost sort of paradoxical impact, where some people are blindly walking through it, excitedly getting pushed along the slippery slope, mostly seeing benefits? Other people are a little bit more attuned, but their voices aren't being heard. How are both happening at the same time?

[00:51:56] WOODROW HARTZOG:
It's such a great question, and I'm so glad that you mentioned the concept of luxury surveillance, which our friend and colleague Chris Gilyard has such done such wonderful work on. And the answer is that the most vulnerable among us are also the least powerful among us to raise a significant legal challenge. If it were distributed evenly, it actually, I think, would help us to democratically come together and deliberate on this in a more meaningful way. But I can't remember who said it. The future's already here, but it's just not evenly distributed. The way I tend to interpret that is the marginalized feel it first and hardest. And you're right, there's this sort of lagging recognition on the most privileged among us that we get to reap the benefits of these things without necessarily seeing the full brunt of that which we have wrought right on the world. And those also, that privileged few, tend to also be the ones that are making the decisions, and I just want to unpack that a little more. To illustrate that point. There was a very famous oral argument in front of the Supreme Court in the case United States v Jones. And this was a case about tracking-- the police doing an unwarranted search using a mobile tracker, a GPS device they had planted on a car. And the debate was whether that violated someone's reasonable expectation of privacy to have a GPS device slapped on your car and follow you everywhere you go. And it wasn't looking good for the defendant there. The judges seemed to be inclined to agree, at least in certain parts of the argument, that maybe there's no reasonable expectation of privacy when you're driving around in public. And then one of the justices, and forgive me, I can't remember which one, said something to--

[00:54:12] EVAN SELINGER:
Sotomayor.

[00:54:13] WOODROW HARTZOG:
 Sotomayor, right. Said something to the effect of would it be-- so what you're telling me, and she was questioning the lawyer for the government that wanted to justify the unauthorized search. She said, what you're telling me is that you, as the government, could walk outside right now and slap a GPS tracker on my car, and you wouldn't need a warrant to do that? This is when you know you've been walked into a trap. But the government's attorney said, yes, that's what we're saying, and everyone sort of gasped. And sure enough, the opinion came out where they said that this was a Fourth Amendment search. And it strikes me that it's so hard for those that are privileged to see the full effect of these surveillance technologies, until by the time they do, we sort of moved on to the next thing because there's such a lag here. So I think that really is sort maybe helps the I can't say that's the full example, but maybe that it helps account for the normalization paradox there.

[00:55:25] EVAN SELINGER:
 Yeah, so let's stick the landing on the legal stuff here, and we can do this in a very, I think, succinct and clear way. We end the article by basically saying, look, we could make a whole bunch of recommendations and we will, because we live in a world filled with constraints. And there are some things that you could do to make facial recognition technology less dangerous, so we offer a bunch of ideas. But we also say, we're really not truly satisfied with all of those. And the only real way, based on everything that we've discussed, the most appropriate way, the most just way to deal with the situation is to not go into technology neutral way and to go for a full throated ban. So just talk us through real quick, if you weren't going to go all the way down the ban highway, what are some of the things that we talked about that might help? And in the end, why are we not satisfied with those? We're reasonable people. We would like reasonable things to be tried, but in the article we argue it's really not enough. Why?

[00:56:26] WOODROW HARTZOG:
Yeah, so ultimately, we conclude that there is no world in which we envision that we are better off with facial recognition technology than worse off with it. Due to the inevitable abuses and irresistible nature of facial recognition for industry, for financial exploitation, and by governments, for the use of exertion of power and many times in unjust ways. And so you could put up guardrails. You could say we have consent requirements or have warrant requirements for government searches. You might even say something along the lines of, you can't use emotion detection software without a meaningful impact assessment, because you need to verify that it works, or that there needs to be some sort of transparency structure so that we can see how it's working and have accountability. There are all kinds of guardrails that have been proposed that you could put up. But ultimately, you and I argue that this is just kicking the can down the road. And during that time, it's going to work a little bit like the Collingridge dilemma, which is unpacked in STS studies, which is the idea that if you regulate too soon, you don't get to reap all the benefits of a technology. But if you wait too late, by the time you get to regulating, the society has become not only acclimated to the tool, but dependent upon it. And so guardrails are just going to further entrench facial recognition systems into every aspect of our lives and continue that obscurity erosion cycle, even with those guardrails. So unless we move away entirely from the idea of a reasonable expectation of privacy that looks to people's expectations, you're still going to have these problems. And so a better step in the right direction would be at least articulated outright prohibitions for particular parties. Say the facial recognition cannot be used by governments or industry, but maybe for research purposes. Or maybe one of the ones that you and I have argued wouldn't be enough, but would at least be a step in the right direction, would be a prohibition on all facial recognition except for in times of natural disasters, or for a very limited sort of range of uses. But even then, you and I ultimately conclude, you're just building a smaller hill that a speed bump that a car is still going to go over. That the car of abuse is still going to get over that speed bump. And so ultimately, we argue that the only way to meaningfully avoid being worse off overall because of facial recognition technology is prohibited outright.

[00:59:41] EVAN SELINGER:
And as a sort of last thing on this. So when you and I have made this claim, and actually you and I are gearing up to give a talk about this in Europe, we've been told, hey, you guys have more European than you sound American. And yet we actually argue in this paper, or at least we point out that this isn't even a European point of view, that the EU AI Act, which is a bit stronger than anything we have in the United States, it has some prohibitions for facial recognition technology. We say that's not enough either.

[01:00:12] WOODROW HARTZOG:
Yeah. And so this is-- it's so interesting that in some circles, the EU is seen as the most extreme regulator, and certainly they're the most robust that we've seen sort of around the world. And you and I are even calling the most extreme, robust intervention that we've seen so far and not enough. And the reason why is because they put in a lot of exemptions. So there are exceptions that still allow governments to use facial recognition technology. That's allow for the uses of it in certain circumstances, even within industry. There's a notable prohibition on emotion recognition technologies, which is great, but I feel like that's just one part of a larger issue around normalization. And so the framework for using facial recognition for things like unlocking your phone, which in isolation doesn't seem risky at all. It's got great privacy engineering on it, and it's all locally stored and all that stuff, but it's still normalizes having your face scanned 10 to 100 times a day, and so there are all of these footholds in the door. The EOA came close to shutting that door entirely. But right as it started to close, they were able to get a foot in, and from that foothold, they're going to start to crack it open just a little more and a little more and a little more. And so I do understand that meaningful privacy protections, just like democracy, have to be constantly fought for. And so I don't think that the fight is over regarding facial recognition technologies, but it is worth recognizing that even the most robust rules that we have out there, I don't think, are yet sufficient to fully protect us from the actual threat of this tool in the systems that we live in.

[01:02:12] EVAN SELINGER:
And on that upbeat note, I think we're going to end this. Thank you. Thank you so much for going over this article.

[01:02:18] WOODROW HARTZOG:
 It's my pleasure. Thanks for having me.
