[00:00:02] EVAN SELINGER:
So it's so great to talk with you today, Jay Stanley. I'm really thrilled that you're able to have this conversation with me. Because in this AI ethics class that I'm teaching, students are going to be reading one of your articles. And in the past when I've discussed this article with students in class, it really turned a lot of lights on for them. It was epiphanous. The article is called The Dawn of Robot Surveillance. And our conversation is meant to help them better understand your ideas and some of the insights that you offer. But before we get into the article, it's important to know that there's a person behind the ideas and get a sense of who you are. So in this class, we'll be reading some people who are academics and some people who are not academics. You're a senior policy analyst with the American Civil Liberties Union, sometimes referred to it as the ACLU. And you're part of the Speech, Privacy, and Technology project. So I think it would be very useful for students to get a sense of, how did you go from getting a graduate degree in American history to working at the ACLU?

[00:01:02] JAY STANLEY:
Yeah, well, I loved being a graduate student, but I increasingly realized that the life of a professor was not for me. And I left graduate school and started working at a technology research company called Forrester Research out of Boston. And while I was there, I did some reports on privacy issues. And through that reporting, I met one of the top people at the ACLU who was looking for people to start up a new program on the information superhighway as it was known. And I started working at the ACLU five weeks before 9/11, believe it or not, and I have been here ever since, so I've seen a lot of things go into under bridge. I've seen a lot of technologies come and go and followed the arc of new technologies for a long time.

[00:01:53] EVAN SELINGER:
So with where we're at today, just give just a very quick overview. So it's like, what's the day to day like for you? Does a lot of that have to do with AI?

[00:02:01] JAY STANLEY:
Yeah, I mean, my job is to be looking a little bit in front of the bow, while a lot of my colleagues are working on the things that are really happening now, and think through issue spot, figure out what things are coming that we should care about, why we should care about them, and, if we do care about them, how we explain to the public why they should care about them. And I do a lot of talking at events. I talk to the media a lot. And I do a fair amount of writing about various technologies. And I would say our overall goal is to try to shape technology and make sure that it's not used to harm people but that new technologies empower individuals and ordinary people and not just big corporations and government agencies.

[00:02:47] EVAN SELINGER:
And on that, let's talk about your big paper, because your title alone gets at something that students are very interested in. I mean, it suggests we're living through, not just an incremental change, but that something brand new is happening. This always comes up. Is AI something new under the sun, or are we dealing with something old with just a new name? And your article claims that a new type of surveillance has come on the scene, and it poses grave risks and grave consequences. So I just want to start with a basic level observation, because a key thing driving your paper is a distinction you make between dumb cameras and smart cameras. What's the difference?

[00:03:28] JAY STANLEY:
So a dumb camera records data, but it doesn't analyze it at all. It records video data. And video data isn't of any use to anybody if it sits on a hard drive. It has to be analyzed. And the way this has always been done before AI was a human would watch it. But humans are very expensive. They have short attention spans. They get bored easily. Government studies have shown that security guard monitoring, video camera feeds gets bored in about 20 minutes. And after that, it's pretty useless at monitoring what's happening on various video feeds. We've all seen in Hollywood movies where there's something going on in one of the screens and the guard is eating and doesn't see it or what have you. And so by putting the analysis into the camera or using analysis outside the camera-- I mean, there's all kinds of different technological configurations you can have. It can be in the cloud analysis, it can be in a box on the site, or it can be in the camera itself. And increasingly, the manufacturers are moving the intelligence into the camera. But now, the monitoring is happening in the camera. That means that the analysis of the video can be scaled way up over what you can analyze with humans. Most video with legacy cameras just sits there on the hard drive. Nobody watches it ever either live or later unless something dramatic goes down. And we implicitly know this as we walk through the world that nobody's going to be watching us. But with AI, you can now watch all this video meaning analyze it and make decisions about what it's seeing. Is this something suspicious? Is this person acting oddly? Do I need to call the attention of the human guards and have them go have a little talk with this person or not? And so I think that that's, in some ways, the big difference. Another difference is that when you have that kind of AI analysis, you can have immediate reactions, real-time reactions to the video as opposed to just using the video for forensic purposes after the fact to find out what happened yesterday or what have you, which is mostly with, again, very small exceptions, the way video is used, because nobody can really pay anybody to watch it.

[00:05:33] EVAN SELINGER:
And with those smart cameras, which are all over the place, there's a lot of advocates for them. I mean, people don't want a dumb phone. They want a smart phone. People don't want a dumb classroom. They want a smart classroom. So advocates of smart cameras and smart, automated video analytics, they say, look, there are many benefits that we could get from this. People say, we can enhance public safety. This technology is going to allow us to respond to emergencies faster. It will help us prevent crime. It will enhance operational efficiency. Because after all, we can monitor large areas and, as you just said, we have less manpower and more efficient analytics. And they say, we can do better business, because we can get more refined insights into customer service, what people prefer, how they're behaving. So essentially, we're living at a time where smartness is equated with benefit. What do you make of all these claims?

[00:06:28] JAY STANLEY:
So I once wrote a piece called The Virtues of Dumbness and it's like, can somebody please find me a dumb television? Because a lot of the smartness in modern smart televisions involves the manufacturer collecting data about you same with cars, same with your phone, honestly. And this is what I mean when I say, yeah, we want smartness to be something that empowers you and doesn't empower somebody else like when you use face recognition on your iPhone, that face recognition is helpful to you. It doesn't leave the phone. It's not somebody spying on you whereas face recognition being used on you instead of by you is a different story and that's the concern here. And of course, look, there are good uses of this technology. I thought about, should the ACLU's position be like, hell no? No video analytics anywhere. Let's ban it. And there's just too many good uses. It's just not realistic. And even if we took that position, we would lose. So now, you're into a more complicated world. But one early video analytics product was attached to a camera at the bottom of a swimming pool that would sound an alarm, in a very crowded swimming pool sound an alarm for the lifeguards if somebody sank to the bottom and didn't move for 10 seconds or what have you. Very useful. Not really any privacy implications. Not really harmful. I'm not going to oppose that. We're not going to oppose that. On the other hand, a lot of this involves very detailed collection, for example, collection data about people. And also sometimes scaling things up is not better. I'm sure the police would love to watch a much wider area. But do you really want three police officers-- imagine if this was not done by AI but was done by humans. Do you really want three police officers on every block and every corner and everywhere you go in your life just watching over you? Maybe you want some police officers there if something goes down. But you don't necessarily want them everywhere in your life, because they have a lot of power over you and so forth. And so often the comparison is made is you're driving along the highway and a police car pulls up behind you. You're not doing anything wrong, you're not speeding let's say, but you're still going to get nervous. It's because that the police officer has a lot of discretion. And we don't want to live our lives that way and this has the potential to do the digital equivalent of putting a police officer every 5 feet.

[00:09:00] EVAN SELINGER:
This is a perfect segue to the next question I want to ask you. But I also want to say when we went over your article in a previous class in person, a version of what you just said came up. I asked the students, how many of you feel nervous at the airport when you're about to go through check through even though you know you've done nothing wrong? And almost every single hand went up. And they looked around and they said, how interesting that is that they know they were being law-abiding citizens and yet merely being observed in that context really made them feel completely uneasy. And I think that leads to this next question, which is your article not only identifies a range of harms and risks. But I think particularly for students who aren't used to thinking about privacy, it also introduces them to some of the essential vocabulary that we should be thinking about. And the first thing that you talk about is the potential risk of chilling effects. What are chilling effects?

[00:09:57] JAY STANLEY:
So chilling effects is a big concept that's very important in constitutional law. And it is basically the idea that you will be made fearful of doing something that you have the perfect right to do and that, in fact, society would want you to do. We want you to express your opinions. We want you to be able to feel free, to put a political slogan on your t-shirt whatever the content of that may be. And yet, even though you have the right to do it, you are afraid to do so because of the things that cause chilling effects. And I think when we're in the presence of a police officer, we know implicitly that, number one, we could be falsely accused of something. The police officer could be abusive and go after us for no good reason. And also the law is complicated. When you're driving along the highway and you're like, well, I'm under the speed limit. Is there something else that I might be doing wrong? There's so many laws like, maybe my tail light's out. Or, is my registration up to date? And even just walking through airline security, I think we implicitly understand that there's a lot of ways that the authorities can go after us that can be unfair from mistaken identity to abuse to some obscure thing that we are, in fact, actually supposedly doing wrong. And in the paper, I talk about the example of somebody putting-- their recycling in the wrong bin. Nobody's going to enforce that in the human world, but we could have a camera that dings you for that.

[00:11:30] EVAN SELINGER:
Yeah, for sure. So chilling effects is one risk and harm that we need to be on the lookout for. But here's another one. As you point out, there are new types of data collection that smart cameras are capable of doing. So you notice, for example, there are possibilities of gathering biometric information like gait analysis and heart rate. And the information that this can offer, you say, can be used to do all kinds of things, detect relationships, group dynamics, reveal certain things about an individual. And in the article, you mentioned that we should be concerned about the possibility that some of this technology is unreliable. It could be error prone and could even be built on faulty assumptions, some of them being pseudoscientific. What are some examples that you find so concerning?

[00:12:20] JAY STANLEY:
Yeah, so I mean, an old school camera just records video of you that goes onto the hard drive in 7-Eleven or wherever it might be and sits there, a new camera can collect demographic information about you, what's your race, what is your gender appearance, what kind of clothes are you wearing. Are you in a suit? Do you have tattoos? What kind of haircut do you have? What are you carrying? What objects are you carrying? And on and on. Again, there's a possibility for the collection of physiological data about you like your heart rate, which can be increasingly reliably detected remotely and potentially some other health indicators too. I talk about in the paper. And then there's a lot of research being done that I refer to in the paper on using AI to do sentiment analysis like, is this person happy? Are they sad? Are they depressed? And interactions between human beings. Is this a couple? Are these two friends? Are they angry at each other? And so researchers are looking into the extent to which AI would be able to detect those kinds of things. Now, a lot of that is snake oil. Psychologists have very definitively said that you cannot make any kind of correlation between somebody's facial muscles and their particular arrangement and how they're feeling inside, because the same feeling expresses itself in different facial expressions, in different people. And the same facial expression can reflect different feelings in different people. And a lot of it is very heavily culturally dependent. But at the end of the day, one of the concerns here is that this stuff's going to be rushed into operation, even though it's pseudoscientific. We see a lot of companies that often push technologies before they're ready and, in some cases, when they will never be ready because the whole theory of them is wrong. And so we worry about these technologies when they work and how powerful they could be at collecting accurate information about you. And we worry about them when they don't work. They can collect inaccurate information about you, which can lead to false arrests, false assumptions about you, false profiles that are built about you, and so forth. And let me just finish with saying one example of a completely pseudoscientific technology that nonetheless is used pretty widely and that is polygraphs or lie detectors. All the scientists have looked at it and said it's completely built on quicksand. The assumptions behind the technology that there are reliable external physiological things that your body does that correlate with lying is completely false and yet the US government uses it, police departments use it in hiring. It's actually banned for use in hiring by the private sector, but it's still plays a big role in our society despite the fact that it's complete baloney.

[00:15:13] EVAN SELINGER:
I can't imagine someone's watching this and isn't asking themselves the question why. Why is it allowed?

[00:15:21] JAY STANLEY:
Well, the national security and law enforcement agencies always get special exemptions from things, because of the deference that our judiciary and our politicians give them, way too much difference in my view. But I think that, in some cases, the people using them don't understand that they are pseudoscientific and little better than the Oracle at Delphi in ancient Greece reading cracked tortoise shells to predict your future. And in other cases, they're used as an intimidation tactic. Because even though the people using them know they don't work, sometimes the subjects think they work and it scares them into telling the truth and so forth.

[00:16:02] EVAN SELINGER:
So here's another risk you point out and I think it's very interesting. A lot of people who advocate for these technologies say, well, humans are biased. Human police officers can be biased. The great thing about this technology is it's going to reduce bias. In the paper, you point out the possibility that the opposite could happen, that it could actually amplify discriminatory effects and bias. How so?

[00:16:27] JAY STANLEY:
OK. So we all know that AI algorithms, LLMs, Large Language Models and others, other areas of AI are trained on existing data from our existing society. Our existing society is riven with biases and prejudices and so forth. And often, the I will internalize and reflect those biases that it absorbs from the data that it's trained on. And sometimes it will internalize those biases and then reflect them back out but in a way that seems very objective, because it's coming from a computer, something called automation bias in which people inherently trust computers more than humans. And so there could be a lot of bias built into the algorithms behind a lot of the analysis, the AI analysis that goes into video monitoring. But also let's say it could also greatly empower real-world examples of bias. Let's say that the authorities have video cameras that are set to set an alarm if somebody is running down the sidewalk. It's well known that Black people are regarded as inherently more suspicious when they're running. So maybe when the guards see a white person running, they don't send anybody. When they see a Black person running, they do. And in the old world, most of the time somebody is running, nobody would notice. But now, every time anybody runs anywhere, it's brought to the attention of the authorities. So just by scaling up the monitoring and the alarming, there could be secondary orders and differences in how people are treated for things that would never have been brought to the attention of the authorities in the first place.

[00:18:23] EVAN SELINGER:
Absolutely. And I have just two more, two more questions about these sorts of risks and harms. And the next one, though, has been the hardest to explain to students, I think it's so important, but it's very subtle. You talk about the risk of overenforcement. And the reason students find this hard is they assume that if there is a law, it should be enforced. And if it shouldn't be enforced, it shouldn't be a law. So if jaywalking is illegal, jaywalking should be enforceable. So why is overenforcement a problem?

[00:18:58] JAY STANLEY:
It's a very reasonable question to ask. The reality, though, is that this attitude that the law is the law breaks down when you examine it more closely. The fact is that there's a wide variety of laws that are on the books, and there's always a give and take between what's on the book as formal law and what the social norms are, what we actually think is bad in society. There are some things that we think are bad that are not against the law, and there are some things that are against the law that nobody thinks is bad. Many states still have statutes on the books that make it illegal to engage in a wide variety of sexual practices that are engaged in by almost everybody who's sexually active these days. And nobody enforces those. And those have been rendered unconstitutional. But there are others that may not have been, but we just-- so there's a give and take. And by enforcing things. absolutely, it really has the potential to make life very unpleasant. There's a quote from Cicero, which is that extreme justice is extreme injustice. And I think that that's part of what he's getting here. And so it is a tricky concept, but you don't want to get a ticket every time you accidentally put your recycling in the wrong bin and the like. And so, yes, you could argue that if laws-- and an example of where there's a difference between laws and norms is speed limits. When you're on a highway, it says speed limit 55. The law is you can't go faster than 55. The norm is it's almost like the minimum speed limit. I was in a car and somebody's complaining, oh my god, that guy is going slower than the speed limit. And so we could have automated systems to give everybody a ticket anytime they go 56 miles an hour or 55.1 miles an hour. Do we want to live in that world? It's much healthier if there's some play in the system. And there's always been play in the system. And then the other thing is that-- and in legal history, the legal realists talk about this, but you can't apply a general rule to specific circumstances without discretion. Another way of putting that is that the world is so complicated is that there will always arise situations that break the rule, that make the rule seem crazy or really not shouldn't apply but it kind of technically applies and it doesn't achieve what the intent of the rule is. And this is why police officers use discretion. My father-in-law, a number of years ago, was sitting at a red light and an ambulance came through in tight traffic with its sirens on. And he pulled forward into the side in order to get out of the way of the ambulance like a good citizen. And there was a big bright flash, and the automated red light camera took a picture of his car, because he had gone into the middle of the intersection against the red light, and he got a ticket in the mail. No human officer ever would have given that ticket. Technically, he did violate the law. You could argue there may be exceptions in the law for getting in the way of ambulances. I don't know. But the point is is that automated enforcement of the rule every single time. And it doesn't make sense, because there's often situations where there's extenuating circumstances where any human being would be like, yeah, it doesn't make sense to apply the rule to you,

[00:22:29] EVAN SELINGER:
Right. So with the jaywalking example, the way I just tried to explain this to students is if the purpose of jaywalking, if the spirit of the law is to maintain public safety and you're jaywalking late at night when there's no cars on the road and there are no safety issues, no reasonable police officer would see that as a ticketable offense, right?

[00:22:48] JAY STANLEY:
Yeah.

[00:22:50] EVAN SELINGER:
OK. One more question on this. So obviously working at the ACLU, the American Constitution and the protections that it offers is very central to the mission of the organization. And one of the constitutional protections that you seem very worried about in the article are constitutional protections related to the Fourth Amendment, which is a right to be protected against unreasonable searches and seizures. When you talk about how smart cameras and smart AI could potentially weaken the Fourth Amendment, why? If the Fourth Amendment gives us these rights, shouldn't it give us these rights whether it was 10 years ago, today, 100 years into the future? Aren't our rights our rights?

[00:23:38] JAY STANLEY:
Yeah, well, changing technology gives new powers to the authorities. And this is a constitutional amendment that was written in the 1700s, and it includes a ban on unreasonable searches and seizures. What's reasonable is very fluid. And so protections that were held by our founders are challenged in new ways by new technology. Thomas Jefferson had all of his letters in his study and books in his study, and probably his doctor visited him in his study. And now, the things you read are held on the servers of an international corporation, Google or whoever, and the authorities claim they can get that without a warrant, because it's not in your property. It's being held by a third party. That's an example of the way things shift. And so the collection of vast piece of new seas of data really has the potential to challenge the boundaries of our privacy that have been built up over centuries, really. And usually when there's a new technology, that gives new powers to law enforcement. And the national security organizations, they try to assert that the old laws don't apply. And then privacy advocates say, well, we do. And some judges have ruled that the Fourth Amendment should preserve that degree of privacy that the founders intended it to or that they understood it to protect. Something like collection of your heart rate as you walk into a store or what have you. That's pretty intimate physiological information about you. It can potentially reveal things about your health status and the like. And the police couldn't just get your doctor's records about all that information for no reason at all. But just because the technology allows it, should they be able to have that access to that information? And so that's an example of the kind of thing that-- There are some very tricky issues. I mean, the ACLU is, among other things, a photographers' rights organization. We have defended people for photographing police. When the police say, sir, you need to turn that camera off, which is an unconstitutional request. But it nevertheless happens a lot. And so there can be First Amendment issues that come in on the other side of this issue that can make it a little bit difficult to know how to draw those lines. But the courts in the US have been grappling with how to apply these old rules to the new technology for a long time. For example, the question is, do you have privacy when you're in public? And for all of human history, when you're in public, the people who you can see can see you. You don't have privacy for them. They see you, you see them. But now, technology can follow you for long periods of time, across space and time as you go across the city in your day and over many weeks or months even. And does the Constitution have anything to say about that? And the courts are generally ruling that, yes, it does.

[00:26:46] EVAN SELINGER:
So let's think about, as we close this out, just a few quick things about the future, because what I like about your article, what students like about it is it's a real roadmap. So we've talked about what makes the present a new space, the dawn of robot surveillance. We've talked about risks and harms, but you don't just leave us there. You have some ideas about going forward. What should we be doing about all this?

[00:27:09] JAY STANLEY:
Yeah, one thing I'd like to point out is a point that I make in the conclusion, which is I'm focused on video, the use of AI in video to monitor us, but really that should be taken as an example or a metaphor for larger potential for surveillance that AI can make decisions about you based on your bank records and your transaction and your credit card records and the content of your conversations if it has access to it. And so the video is what I focus on here, but really a lot of what I'm saying can apply to machines monitoring you and your life and making assessments and decisions about you based on that monitoring. But I think that in terms of video surveillance and potentially a lot of these other surveillances, we need transparency, so that we can evaluate these systems. Are they, in fact, acting in ways that are discriminatory? Are they being unfair? Are they actually worth the money that's being spent on them? Maybe they don't work well at all especially some of the snake oil solutions like emotion recognition or whatever. And policymakers, whether it's city council members or state legislators or members of Congress, can't really make decisions and experts can't evaluate them unless we have information about how they are being run and what the effects are. There should be rules around the minimization of data, how data is handled that's collected, when these systems can, cannot be used, and rules like that.

[00:28:56] EVAN SELINGER:
So if you're a student, you've watched this video, you read the article, get a sense of, wow, I hadn't thought about these things before, if they're interested, what should students be thinking about in terms of next steps? Some will probably be in industry and others might have interests In doing things like working in the nonprofit space, working with civil liberties organizations or human rights organizations. Any thoughts there?

[00:29:26] JAY STANLEY:
Yeah, I think if you are somebody who's working on technology, the first step is to just be aware of how these technologies can really change lives and can cause real problems for people and just being aware of that is half the battle. Sometimes, that's as much as you can do depending on who your bosses are and what they insist on doing or the like. But a lot of these things happen just because nobody stops and thinks about them. And so just doing that is half the battle. But otherwise, a lot of times, with technology, you can have your cake and eat it too. There's a whole field of cryptography using techniques such as zero-knowledge proofs that can, for example, allow you to prove something without sharing that data. There are ways that you can use this cryptography to hide your identity while still proving things about yourself and the like. And I think that there's a lot of room for those privacy-preserving technologies, cryptographic technologies and the like to be implemented in systems, so that the goals can be achieved without actually harming or threatening people's privacy.

[00:30:53] EVAN SELINGER:
And last, what's next for you?

[00:30:57] JAY STANLEY:
Well, I'm monitoring this kind of technology and how it's used especially by police departments. I'm working on drones. And a lot of this is relevant, because drones collect video, right? I'm working on license plate scanners and tracking and a number of other technologies. And right now, I'm very closely following large language models and the technology there, which is so fast moving. And it's a really dramatic what's been happening, and I was actually surprised that nobody was talking about, the rapid changes in there. And then suddenly, with the DeepSeek news, it really burst into public awareness in a way that I've been waiting to happen. But that's just one chapter. And that story is just part of an overarching trend in this technology, which is moving so fast and the same kind of technology with the original ChatGPT that you used to have to connect to a $100 million server farm can now be run on a consumer laptop. So it's really amazing what's happening in that space, and it's going to have huge effects on our society and on our freedoms depending on how it goes. So that's something I'm starting to watch really closely.

[00:32:16] EVAN SELINGER:
All right. Thank you so much, Jay. Really really appreciate it.

[00:32:20] JAY STANLEY:
You're very welcome. Thanks so much for having me.
